Computer Architecture Formulas
1. CPU time = Instruction count # Clock cycles per instruction # Clock cycle time
2. X is n times faster than Y: n = Execution time Y / Execution time X = Performance X / Performance Y
1
Execution time old
3. Amdahl’s Law: Speedupoverall = ------------------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fraction enhanced
Execution time new (#1 – Fraction
enhanced ) + ------------------------------------
Speedup enhanced
2
4. Energydynamic1 / 2 # Capacitive load # Voltage
5. Power dynamic1 / 2 # Capacitive load # Voltage # Frequency switched
6. Power static
2
Current static # Voltage
7. Availability = Mean time to fail / (Mean time to fail + Mean time to repair)
8. Die yield = Wafer yield # 1 / ( 1 + Defects per unit area # Die area )
N
where Wafer yield accounts for wafers that are so bad they need not be tested and N is a parameter called
the process-complexity factor, a measure of manufacturing difficulty. N ranges from 11.5 to 15.5 in 2011.
9. Means—arithmetic (AM), weighted arithmetic (WAM), and geometric (GM):
n
1
AM = --
n
n
n
Weight i # Time i GM =
Time i WAM =
i =1
n
i =1
Time i
i=1
where Timei is the execution time for the ith program of a total of n in the workload, Weighti is the
weighting of the ith program in the workload.
10. Average memory-access time = Hit time + Miss rate # Miss penalty
11. Misses per instruction = Miss rate # Memory access per instruction
12. Cache index size: 2index = Cache size / (Block size # Set associativity)
Total Facility Power
13. Power Utilization Effectiveness (PUE) of a Warehouse Scale Computer = -------------------------------------------------
IT Equipment Power
Rules of Thumb
1. Amdahl/Case Rule: A balanced computer system needs about 1 MB of main memory capacity and 1
megabit per second of I/O bandwidth per MIPS of CPU performance.
2. 90/10 Locality Rule: A program executes about 90% of its instructions in 10% of its code.
3. Bandwidth Rule: Bandwidth grows by at least the square of the improvement in latency.
4. 2:1 Cache Rule: The miss rate of a direct-mapped cache of size N is about the same as a two-way set-
associative cache of size N/2.
5. Dependability Rule: Design with no single point of failure.
6. Watt-Year Rule: The fully burdened cost of a Watt per year in a Warehouse Scale Computer in North
America in 2011, including the cost of amortizing the power and cooling infrastructure, is about $2.

1.1
Introduction
Computer technology has made incredible progress in the roughly 70 years since
the first general-purpose electronic computer was created. Today, less than $500
will purchase a cell phone that has as much performance as the world’s fastest
computer bought in 1993 for $50 million. This rapid improvement has come both
from advances in the technology used to build computers and from innovations in
computer design.
Although technological improvements historically have been fairly steady,
progress arising from better computer architectures has been much less consistent.
During the first 25 years of electronic computers, both forces made a major con-
tribution, delivering performance improvement of about 25% per year. The late
1970s saw the emergence of the microprocessor. The ability of the microprocessor
to ride the improvements in integrated circuit technology led to a higher rate of
performance improvement—roughly 35% growth per year.
This growth rate, combined with the cost advantages of a mass-produced
microprocessor, led to an increasing fraction of the computer business being based
on microprocessors. In addition, two significant changes in the computer market-
place made it easier than ever before to succeed commercially with a new archi-
tecture. First, the virtual elimination of assembly language programming reduced
the need for object-code compatibility. Second, the creation of standardized,
vendor-independent operating systems, such as UNIX and its clone, Linux, low-
ered the cost and risk of bringing out a new architecture.
These changes made it possible to develop successfully a new set of architec-
tures with simpler instructions, called RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computer)
architectures, in the early 1980s. The RISC-based machines focused the attention
of designers on two critical performance techniques, the exploitation of instruc-
tion-level parallelism (initially through pipelining and later through multiple
instruction issue) and the use of caches (initially in simple forms and later using
more sophisticated organizations and optimizations).
The RISC-based computers raised the performance bar, forcing prior architec-
tures to keep up or disappear. The Digital Equipment Vax could not, and so it was
replaced by a RISC architecture. Intel rose to the challenge, primarily by translat-
ing 80x86 instructions into RISC-like instructions internally, allowing it to adopt
many of the innovations first pioneered in the RISC designs. As transistor counts
soared in the late 1990s, the hardware overhead of translating the more complex
x 86 architecture became negligible. In low-end applications, such as cell phones,
the cost in power and silicon area of the x 86-translation overhead helped lead to a
RISC architecture, ARM, becoming dominant.
Figure 1.1 shows that the combination of architectural and organizational
enhancements led to 17 years of sustained growth in performance at an annual rate
of over 50%—a rate that is unprecedented in the computer industry.
The effect of this dramatic growth rate during the 20th century was fourfold.
First, it has significantly enhanced the capability available to computer users. For
many applications, the highest-performance microprocessors outperformed the
supercomputer of less than 20 years earlier.Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.2 GHz (Boost to 4.5 GHz)
Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.0 GHz (Boost to 4.2 GHz)
Intel Core i7 4 cores 4.0 GHz (Boost to 4.2 GHz)
Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.7 GHz (Boost to 4.1 GHz)
Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.6 GHz (Boost to 4.0 GHz)
Intel Xeon 4 cores 3.6 GHz (Boost to 4.0 GHz)
Intel Core i7 4 cores 3.4 GHz (boost to 3.8 GHz)
49,935
Intel Xeon 6 cores, 3.3 GHz (boost to 3.6 GHz)
49,870
Intel Xeon 4 cores, 3.3 GHz (boost to 3.6 GHz)
39,419
Intel Core i7 Extreme 4 cores 3.2 GHz (boost to 3.5 GHz)
31,999
49,935
Intel Core Duo Extreme 2 cores, 3.0 GHz
21,871
40,967
34,967
Intel Core 2 Extreme 2 cores, 2.9 GHz
24,129
AMD Athlon 64, 2.8 GHz
14,387 19,484
AMD Athlon, 2.6 GHz
11,865
Intel Xeon EE 3.2 GHz
6,681 7,108
Intel D850EMVR motherboard (3.06 GHz, Pentium 4 processor with Hyper-Threading Technology)
6,043
4,195
IBM Power4, 1.3 GHz
3,016
Intel VC820 motherboard, 1.0 GHz Pentium III processor
1,779
Professional Workstation XP1000, 667 MHz 21264A
1,267
Digital AlphaServer 8400 6/575, 575 MHz 21264
993
AlphaServer 4000 5/600, 600 MHz 21164
649
Digital Alphastation 5/500, 500 MHz
481
Digital Alphastation 5/300, 300 MHz
280
23%/year
12%/year 3.5%/year
Digital Alphastation 4/266, 266 MHz
183
IBM POWERstation 100, 150 MHz
117
Performance (vs. VAX-11/780)
100,000
10,000
1000
100
Digital 3000 AXP/500, 150 MHz
HP 9000/750, 66 MHz
80
51
IBM RS6000/540, 30 MHz
MIPS M2000, 25 MHz
18
MIPS M/120, 16.7 MHz
13
Sun-4/260, 16.7 MHz
9
10
VAX 8700, 22 MHz
24
52%/year
5
AX-11/780, 5 MHz
25%/year
1 1
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018
1.1
Introduction
■
3
Figure 1.1 Growth in processor performance over 40 years. This chart plots program performance relative to the VAX 11/780 as measured by
the SPEC integer benchmarks (see Section 1.8). Prior to the mid-1980s, growth in processor performance was largely technology-driven and
averaged about 22% per year, or doubling performance every 3.5 years. The increase in growth to about 52% starting in 1986, or doubling every
2 years, is attributable to more advanced architectural and organizational ideas typified in RISC architectures. By 2003 this growth led to a dif-
ference in performance of an approximate factor of 25 versus the performance that would have occurred if it had continued at the 22% rate. In
2003 the limits of power due to the end of Dennard scaling and the available instruction-level parallelism slowed uniprocessor performance to
23% per year until 2011, or doubling every 3.5 years. (The fastest SPECintbase performance since 2007 has had automatic parallelization turned
on, so uniprocessor speed is harder to gauge. These results are limited to single-chip systems with usually four cores per chip.) From 2011 to 2015,
the annual improvement was less than 12%, or doubling every 8 years in part due to the limits of parallelism of Amdahl’s Law. Since 2015, with the
end of Moore’s Law, improvement has been just 3.5% per year, or doubling every 20 years! Performance for floating-point-oriented calculations
follows the same trends, but typically has 1% to 2% higher annual growth in each shaded region. Figure 1.11 on page 27 shows the improvement
in clock rates for these same eras. Because SPEC has changed over the years, performance of newer machines is estimated by a scaling factor that
relates the performance for different versions of SPEC: SPEC89, SPEC92, SPEC95, SPEC2000, and SPEC2006. There are too few results for SPEC2017
to plot yet.4
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Second, this dramatic improvement in cost-performance led to new classes of
computers. Personal computers and workstations emerged in the 1980s with the
availability of the microprocessor. The past decade saw the rise of smart cell
phones and tablet computers, which many people are using as their primary com-
puting platforms instead of PCs. These mobile client devices are increasingly using
the Internet to access warehouses containing 100,000 servers, which are being
designed as if they were a single gigantic computer.
Third, improvement of semiconductor manufacturing as predicted by Moore’s
law has led to the dominance of microprocessor-based computers across the entire
range of computer design. Minicomputers, which were traditionally made from
off-the-shelf logic or from gate arrays, were replaced by servers made by using
microprocessors. Even mainframe computers and high-performance supercom-
puters are all collections of microprocessors.
The preceding hardware innovations led to a renaissance in computer design,
which emphasized both architectural innovation and efficient use of technology
improvements. This rate of growth compounded so that by 2003, high-
performance microprocessors were 7.5 times as fast as what would have been
obtained by relying solely on technology, including improved circuit design, that
is, 52% per year versus 35% per year.
This hardware renaissance led to the fourth impact, which was on software
development. This 50,000-fold performance improvement since 1978 (see
Figure 1.1) allowed modern programmers to trade performance for productivity.
In place of performance-oriented languages like C and C++, much more program-
ming today is done in managed programming languages like Java and Scala. More-
over, scripting languages like JavaScript and Python, which are even more
productive, are gaining in popularity along with programming frameworks like
AngularJS and Django. To maintain productivity and try to close the performance
gap, interpreters with just-in-time compilers and trace-based compiling are repla-
cing the traditional compiler and linker of the past. Software deployment is chang-
ing as well, with Software as a Service (SaaS) used over the Internet replacing
shrink-wrapped software that must be installed and run on a local computer.
The nature of applications is also changing. Speech, sound, images, and video
are becoming increasingly important, along with predictable response time that is
so critical to the user experience. An inspiring example is Google Translate. This
application lets you hold up your cell phone to point its camera at an object, and the
image is sent wirelessly over the Internet to a warehouse-scale computer (WSC)
that recognizes the text in the photo and translates it into your native language.
You can also speak into it, and it will translate what you said into audio output
in another language. It translates text in 90 languages and voice in 15 languages.
Alas, Figure 1.1 also shows that this 17-year hardware renaissance is over. The
fundamental reason is that two characteristics of semiconductor processes that
were true for decades no longer hold.
In 1974 Robert Dennard observed that power density was constant for a given
area of silicon even as you increased the number of transistors because of smaller
dimensions of each transistor. Remarkably, transistors could go faster but use less1.1
Introduction
■
5
power. Dennard scaling ended around 2004 because current and voltage couldn’t
keep dropping and still maintain the dependability of integrated circuits.
This change forced the microprocessor industry to use multiple efficient pro-
cessors or cores instead of a single inefficient processor. Indeed, in 2004 Intel can-
celed its high-performance uniprocessor projects and joined others in declaring
that the road to higher performance would be via multiple processors per chip
rather than via faster uniprocessors. This milestone signaled a historic switch from
relying solely on instruction-level parallelism (ILP), the primary focus of the first
three editions of this book, to data-level parallelism (DLP) and thread-level par-
allelism (TLP), which were featured in the fourth edition and expanded in the fifth
edition. The fifth edition also added WSCs and request-level parallelism (RLP),
which is expanded in this edition. Whereas the compiler and hardware conspire
to exploit ILP implicitly without the programmer’s attention, DLP, TLP, and
RLP are explicitly parallel, requiring the restructuring of the application so that
it can exploit explicit parallelism. In some instances, this is easy; in many, it is
a major new burden for programmers.
Amdahl’s Law (Section 1.9) prescribes practical limits to the number of useful
cores per chip. If 10% of the task is serial, then the maximum performance benefit
from parallelism is 10 no matter how many cores you put on the chip.
The second observation that ended recently is Moore’s Law. In 1965 Gordon
Moore famously predicted that the number of transistors per chip would double
every year, which was amended in 1975 to every two years. That prediction lasted
for about 50 years, but no longer holds. For example, in the 2010 edition of this
book, the most recent Intel microprocessor had 1,170,000,000 transistors. If
Moore’s Law had continued, we could have expected microprocessors in 2016
to have 18,720,000,000 transistors. Instead, the equivalent Intel microprocessor
has just 1,750,000,000 transistors, or off by a factor of 10 from what Moore’s
Law would have predicted.
The combination of
■transistors no longer getting much better because of the slowing of Moore’s
Law and the end of Dinnard scaling,
■the unchanging power budgets for microprocessors,
■the replacement of the single power-hungry processor with several energy-
efficient processors, and
■the limits to multiprocessing to achieve Amdahl’s Law
caused improvements in processor performance to slow down, that is, to double
every 20 years, rather than every 1.5 years as it did between 1986 and 2003
(see Figure 1.1).
The only path left to improve energy-performance-cost is specialization. Future
microprocessors will include several domain-specific cores that perform only one
class of computations well, but they do so remarkably better than general-purpose
cores. The new Chapter 7 in this edition introduces domain-specific architectures.6
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
This text is about the architectural ideas and accompanying compiler improve-
ments that made the incredible growth rate possible over the past century, the rea-
sons for the dramatic change, and the challenges and initial promising approaches
to architectural ideas, compilers, and interpreters for the 21st century. At the core is
a quantitative approach to computer design and analysis that uses empirical obser-
vations of programs, experimentation, and simulation as its tools. It is this style and
approach to computer design that is reflected in this text. The purpose of this chap-
ter is to lay the quantitative foundation on which the following chapters and appen-
dices are based.
This book was written not only to explain this design style but also to stimulate
you to contribute to this progress. We believe this approach will serve the computers
of the future just as it worked for the implicitly parallel computers of the past.
1.2
Classes of Computers
These changes have set the stage for a dramatic change in how we view computing,
computing applications, and the computer markets in this new century. Not since
the creation of the personal computer have we seen such striking changes in the way
computers appear and in how they are used. These changes in computer use have led
to five diverse computing markets, each characterized by different applications,
requirements, and computing technologies. Figure 1.2 summarizes these main-
stream classes of computing environments and their important characteristics.
Internet of Things/Embedded Computers
Embedded computers are found in everyday machines: microwaves, washing
machines, most printers, networking switches, and all automobiles. The phrase
FeaturePersonal
mobile device
(PMD)DesktopServerClusters/warehouse-
scale computerInternet of
things/
embedded
Price of system$100–$1000$300–$2500$5000–$10,000,000$100,000–$200,000,000$10–$100,000
Price of
microprocessor$10–$100$50–$500$200–$2000$50–$250$0.01–$100
Critical system
design issuesCost, energy,
media
performance,
responsivenessPrice-
performance,
energy, graphics
performanceThroughput,
availability,
scalability, energyPrice-performance,
throughput, energy
proportionalityPrice, energy,
application-
specific
performance
Figure 1.2 A summary of the five mainstream computing classes and their system characteristics. Sales in 2015
included about 1.6 billion PMDs (90% cell phones), 275 million desktop PCs, and 15 million servers. The total number
of embedded processors sold was nearly 19 billion. In total, 14.8 billion ARM-technology-based chips were shipped in
2015. Note the wide range in system price for servers and embedded systems, which go from USB keys to network
routers. For servers, this range arises from the need for very large-scale multiprocessor systems for high-end trans-
action processing.1.2
Classes of Computers
■
7
Internet of Things (IoT) refers to embedded computers that are connected to the
Internet, typically wirelessly. When augmented with sensors and actuators, IoT
devices collect useful data and interact with the physical world, leading to a wide
variety of “smart” applications, such as smart watches, smart thermostats, smart
speakers, smart cars, smart homes, smart grids, and smart cities.
Embedded computers have the widest spread of processing power and cost.
They include 8-bit to 32-bit processors that may cost one penny, and high-end
64-bit processors for cars and network switches that cost $100. Although the range
of computing power in the embedded computing market is very large, price is a key
factor in the design of computers for this space. Performance requirements do exist,
of course, but the primary goal often meets the performance need at a minimum
price, rather than achieving more performance at a higher price. The projections
for the number of IoT devices in 2020 range from 20 to 50 billion.
Most of this book applies to the design, use, and performance of embedded
processors, whether they are off-the-shelf microprocessors or microprocessor
cores that will be assembled with other special-purpose hardware.
Unfortunately, the data that drive the quantitative design and evaluation of
other classes of computers have not yet been extended successfully to embedded
computing (see the challenges with EEMBC, for example, in Section 1.8). Hence
we are left for now with qualitative descriptions, which do not fit well with the rest
of the book. As a result, the embedded material is concentrated in Appendix E. We
believe a separate appendix improves the flow of ideas in the text while allowing
readers to see how the differing requirements affect embedded computing.
Personal Mobile Device
Personal mobile device (PMD) is the term we apply to a collection of wireless
devices with multimedia user interfaces such as cell phones, tablet computers,
and so on. Cost is a prime concern given the consumer price for the whole
product is a few hundred dollars. Although the emphasis on energy efficiency
is frequently driven by the use of batteries, the need to use less expensive packag-
ing—plastic versus ceramic—and the absence of a fan for cooling also limit total
power consumption. We examine the issue of energy and power in more detail
in Section 1.5. Applications on PMDs are often web-based and media-oriented,
like the previously mentioned Google Translate example. Energy and size
requirements lead to use of Flash memory for storage (Chapter 2) instead of
magnetic disks.
The processors in a PMD are often considered embedded computers, but we
are keeping them as a separate category because PMDs are platforms that can
run externally developed software, and they share many of the characteristics of
desktop computers. Other embedded devices are more limited in hardware and
software sophistication. We use the ability to run third-party software as the divid-
ing line between nonembedded and embedded computers.
Responsiveness and predictability are key characteristics for media applica-
tions. A real-time performance requirement means a segment of the application
has an absolute maximum execution time. For example, in playing a video on a8
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
PMD, the time to process each video frame is limited, since the processor must
accept and process the next frame shortly. In some applications, a more nuanced
requirement exists: the average time for a particular task is constrained as well as
the number of instances when some maximum time is exceeded. Such
approaches—sometimes called soft real-time—arise when it is possible to miss
the time constraint on an event occasionally, as long as not too many are missed.
Real-time performance tends to be highly application-dependent.
Other key characteristics in many PMD applications are the need to minimize
memory and the need to use energy efficiently. Energy efficiency is driven by both
battery power and heat dissipation. The memory can be a substantial portion of the
system cost, and it is important to optimize memory size in such cases. The impor-
tance of memory size translates to an emphasis on code size, since data size is dic-
tated by the application.
Desktop Computing
The first, and possibly still the largest market in dollar terms, is desktop computing.
Desktop computing spans from low-end netbooks that sell for under $300 to high-
end, heavily configured workstations that may sell for $2500. Since 2008, more
than half of the desktop computers made each year have been battery operated lap-
top computers. Desktop computing sales are declining.
Throughout this range in price and capability, the desktop market tends to
be driven to optimize price-performance. This combination of performance
(measured primarily in terms of compute performance and graphics perfor-
mance) and price of a system is what matters most to customers in this market,
and hence to computer designers. As a result, the newest, highest-performance
microprocessors and cost-reduced microprocessors often appear first in desktop
systems (see Section 1.6 for a discussion of the issues affecting the cost of
computers).
Desktop computing also tends to be reasonably well characterized in terms of
applications and benchmarking, though the increasing use of web-centric, interac-
tive applications poses new challenges in performance evaluation.
Servers
As the shift to desktop computing occurred in the 1980s, the role of servers grew to
provide larger-scale and more reliable file and computing services. Such servers
have become the backbone of large-scale enterprise computing, replacing the tra-
ditional mainframe.
For servers, different characteristics are important. First, availability is critical.
(We discuss availability in Section 1.7.) Consider the servers running ATM
machines for banks or airline reservation systems. Failure of such server systems
is far more catastrophic than failure of a single desktop, since these servers must
operate seven days a week, 24 hours a day. Figure 1.3 estimates revenue costs of
downtime for server applications.1.2
Classes of Computers
■
9
Annual losses with downtime of
Application
Brokerage service
Cost of downtime
per hour1%
(87.6 h/year)0.5%
(43.8 h/year)0.1%
(8.8 h/year)
$4,000,000$350,400,000$175,200,000$35,000,000
Energy$1,750,000$153,300,000$76,700,000$15,300,000
Telecom$1,250,000$109,500,000$54,800,000$11,000,000
Manufacturing$1,000,000$87,600,000$43,800,000$8,800,000
Retail$650,000$56,900,000$28,500,000$5,700,000
Health care$400,000$35,000,000$17,500,000$3,500,000
Media$50,000$4,400,000$2,200,000$400,000
Figure 1.3 Costs rounded to nearest $100,000 of an unavailable system are shown by analyzing the cost of down-
time (in terms of immediately lost revenue), assuming three different levels of availability, and that downtime is
distributed uniformly. These data are from Landstrom (2014) and were collected and analyzed by Contingency Plan-
ning Research.
A second key feature of server systems is scalability. Server systems often
grow in response to an increasing demand for the services they support or an
expansion in functional requirements. Thus the ability to scale up the computing
capacity, the memory, the storage, and the I/O bandwidth of a server is crucial.
Finally, servers are designed for efficient throughput. That is, the overall per-
formance of the server—in terms of transactions per minute or web pages served
per second—is what is crucial. Responsiveness to an individual request remains
important, but overall efficiency and cost-effectiveness, as determined by how
many requests can be handled in a unit time, are the key metrics for most servers.
We return to the issue of assessing performance for different types of computing
environments in Section 1.8.
Clusters/Warehouse-Scale Computers
The growth of Software as a Service (SaaS) for applications like search, social net-
working, video viewing and sharing, multiplayer games, online shopping, and so
on has led to the growth of a class of computers called clusters. Clusters are col-
lections of desktop computers or servers connected by local area networks to act as
a single larger computer. Each node runs its own operating system, and nodes com-
municate using a networking protocol. WSCs are the largest of the clusters, in that
they are designed so that tens of thousands of servers can act as one. Chapter 6
describes this class of extremely large computers.
Price-performance and power are critical to WSCs since they are so large. As
Chapter 6 explains, the majority of the cost of a warehouse is associated with
power and cooling of the computers inside the warehouse. The annual amortized
computers themselves and the networking gear cost for a WSC is $40 million,
because they are usually replaced every few years. When you are buying that10
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
much computing, you need to buy wisely, because a 10% improvement in price-
performance means an annual savings of $4 million (10% of $40 million) per
WSC; a company like Amazon might have 100 WSCs!
WSCs are related to servers in that availability is critical. For example, Ama-
zon.com had $136 billion in sales in 2016. As there are about 8800 hours in a year,
the average revenue per hour was about $15 million. During a peak hour for Christ-
mas shopping, the potential loss would be many times higher. As Chapter 6
explains, the difference between WSCs and servers is that WSCs use redundant,
inexpensive components as the building blocks, relying on a software layer to
catch and isolate the many failures that will happen with computing at this scale
to deliver the availability needed for such applications. Note that scalability for a
WSC is handled by the local area network connecting the computers and not by
integrated computer hardware, as in the case of servers.
Supercomputers are related to WSCs in that they are equally expensive,
costing hundreds of millions of dollars, but supercomputers differ by emphasi-
zing floating-point performance and by running large, communication-intensive
batch programs that can run for weeks at a time. In contrast, WSCs emphasize
interactive applications, large-scale storage, dependability, and high Internet
bandwidth.
Classes of Parallelism and Parallel Architectures
Parallelism at multiple levels is now the driving force of computer design across all
four classes of computers, with energy and cost being the primary constraints.
There are basically two kinds of parallelism in applications:
1. Data-level parallelism (DLP) arises because there are many data items that can
be operated on at the same time.
2. Task-level parallelism (TLP) arises because tasks of work are created that can
operate independently and largely in parallel.
Computer hardware in turn can exploit these two kinds of application parallelism in
four major ways:
1. Instruction-level parallelism exploits data-level parallelism at modest levels
with compiler help using ideas like pipelining and at medium levels using ideas
like speculative execution.
2. Vector architectures, graphic processor units (GPUs), and multimedia instruc-
tion sets exploit data-level parallelism by applying a single instruction to a col-
lection of data in parallel.
3. Thread-level parallelism exploits either data-level parallelism or task-level par-
allelism in a tightly coupled hardware model that allows for interaction between
parallel threads.
4. Request-level parallelism exploits parallelism among largely decoupled tasks
specified by the programmer or the operating system.1.3
Defining Computer Architecture
■
11
When Flynn (1966) studied the parallel computing efforts in the 1960s, he
found a simple classification whose abbreviations we still use today. They target
data-level parallelism and task-level parallelism. He looked at the parallelism in the
instruction and data streams called for by the instructions at the most constrained
component of the multiprocessor and placed all computers in one of four
categories:
1. Single instruction stream, single data stream (SISD)—This category is the uni-
processor. The programmer thinks of it as the standard sequential computer, but
it can exploit ILP. Chapter 3 covers SISD architectures that use ILP techniques
such as superscalar and speculative execution.
2. Single instruction stream, multiple data streams (SIMD)—The same instruc-
tion is executed by multiple processors using different data streams. SIMD com-
puters exploit data-level parallelism by applying the same operations to
multiple items of data in parallel. Each processor has its own data memory
(hence, the MD of SIMD), but there is a single instruction memory and control
processor, which fetches and dispatches instructions. Chapter 4 covers DLP and
three different architectures that exploit it: vector architectures, multimedia
extensions to standard instruction sets, and GPUs.
3. Multiple instruction streams, single data stream (MISD)—No commercial mul-
tiprocessor of this type has been built to date, but it rounds out this simple
classification.
4. Multiple instruction streams, multiple data streams (MIMD)—Each processor
fetches its own instructions and operates on its own data, and it targets task-level
parallelism. In general, MIMD is more flexible than SIMD and thus more gen-
erally applicable, but it is inherently more expensive than SIMD. For example,
MIMD computers can also exploit data-level parallelism, although the overhead
is likely to be higher than would be seen in an SIMD computer. This overhead
means that grain size must be sufficiently large to exploit the parallelism effi-
ciently. Chapter 5 covers tightly coupled MIMD architectures, which exploit
thread-level parallelism because multiple cooperating threads operate in paral-
lel. Chapter 6 covers loosely coupled MIMD architectures—specifically, clus-
ters and warehouse-scale computers—that exploit request-level parallelism,
where many independent tasks can proceed in parallel naturally with little need
for communication or synchronization.
This taxonomy is a coarse model, as many parallel processors are hybrids of the
SISD, SIMD, and MIMD classes. Nonetheless, it is useful to put a framework on
the design space for the computers we will see in this book.
1.3
Defining Computer Architecture
The task the computer designer faces is a complex one: determine what attributes
are important for a new computer, then design a computer to maximize12
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
performance and energy efficiency while staying within cost, power, and availabil-
ity constraints. This task has many aspects, including instruction set design, func-
tional organization, logic design, and implementation. The implementation may
encompass integrated circuit design, packaging, power, and cooling. Optimizing
the design requires familiarity with a very wide range of technologies, from com-
pilers and operating systems to logic design and packaging.
A few decades ago, the term computer architecture generally referred to only
instruction set design. Other aspects of computer design were called implementa-
tion, often insinuating that implementation is uninteresting or less challenging.
We believe this view is incorrect. The architect’s or designer’s job is much
more than instruction set design, and the technical hurdles in the other aspects
of the project are likely more challenging than those encountered in instruction
set design. We’ll quickly review instruction set architecture before describing
the larger challenges for the computer architect.
Instruction Set Architecture: The Myopic View
of Computer Architecture
We use the term instruction set architecture (ISA) to refer to the actual
programmer-visible instruction set in this book. The ISA serves as the boundary
between the software and hardware. This quick review of ISA will use examples
from 80x86, ARMv8, and RISC-V to illustrate the seven dimensions of an ISA.
The most popular RISC processors come from ARM (Advanced RISC Machine),
which were in 14.8 billion chips shipped in 2015, or roughly 50 times as many
chips that shipped with 80x86 processors. Appendices A and K give more details
on the three ISAs.
RISC-V (“RISC Five”) is a modern RISC instruction set developed at the
University of California, Berkeley, which was made free and openly adoptable
in response to requests from industry. In addition to a full software stack (com-
pilers, operating systems, and simulators), there are several RISC-V implementa-
tions freely available for use in custom chips or in field-programmable gate arrays.
Developed 30 years after the first RISC instruction sets, RISC-V inherits its ances-
tors’ good ideas—a large set of registers, easy-to-pipeline instructions, and a lean
set of operations—while avoiding their omissions or mistakes. It is a free and
open, elegant example of the RISC architectures mentioned earlier, which is
why more than 60 companies have joined the RISC-V foundation, including
AMD, Google, HP Enterprise, IBM, Microsoft, Nvidia, Qualcomm, Samsung,
and Western Digital. We use the integer core ISA of RISC-V as the example
ISA in this book.
1. Class of ISA—Nearly all ISAs today are classified as general-purpose register
architectures, where the operands are either registers or memory locations. The
80x86 has 16 general-purpose registers and 16 that can hold floating-point data,
while RISC-V has 32 general-purpose and 32 floating-point registers (see
Figure 1.4). The two popular versions of this class are register-memory ISAs,1.3
Defining Computer Architecture
■
13
RegisterNameUse
Saver
x0zeroThe constant value 0N.A.
x1raReturn addressCaller
x2spStack pointerCallee
x3gpGlobal pointer–
x4tpThread pointer–
x5–x7t0–t2TemporariesCaller
x8s0/fpSaved register/frame pointerCallee
x9s1Saved registerCallee
x10–x11a0–a1Function arguments/return valuesCaller
x12–x17a2–a7Function argumentsCaller
x18–x27s2–s11Saved registersCallee
x28–x31t3–t6TemporariesCaller
f0–f7ft0–ft7FP temporariesCaller
f8–f9fs0–fs1FP saved registersCallee
f10–f11fa0–fa1FP function arguments/return valuesCaller
f12–f17fa2–fa7FP function argumentsCaller
f18–f27fs2–fs11FP saved registersCallee
f28–f31ft8–ft11FP temporariesCaller
Figure 1.4 RISC-V registers, names, usage, and calling conventions. In addition to the
32 general-purpose registers (x0–x31), RISC-V has 32 floating-point registers (f0–f31)
that can hold either a 32-bit single-precision number or a 64-bit double-precision num-
ber. The registers that are preserved across a procedure call are labeled “Callee” saved.
such as the 80x86, which can access memory as part of many instructions, and
load-store ISAs, such as ARMv8 and RISC-V, which can access memory
only with load or store instructions. All ISAs announced since 1985 are
load-store.
2. Memory addressing—Virtually all desktop and server computers, including the
80x86, ARMv8, and RISC-V, use byte addressing to access memory operands.
Some architectures, like ARMv8, require that objects must be aligned. An
access to an object of size s bytes at byte address A is aligned if A mod
s ¼ 0. (See Figure A.5 on page A-8.) The 80x86 and RISC-V do not require
alignment, but accesses are generally faster if operands are aligned.
3. Addressing modes—In addition to specifying registers and constant operands,
addressing modes specify the address of a memory object. RISC-V addressing
modes are Register, Immediate (for constants), and Displacement, where a con-
stant offset is added to a register to form the memory address. The 80x86
supports those three modes, plus three variations of displacement: no register
(absolute), two registers (based indexed with displacement), and two registers14
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
where one register is multiplied by the size of the operand in bytes (based with
scaled index and displacement). It has more like the last three modes, minus the
displacement field, plus register indirect, indexed, and based with scaled index.
ARMv8 has the three RISC-V addressing modes plus PC-relative addressing,
the sum of two registers, and the sum of two registers where one register is
multiplied by the size of the operand in bytes. It also has autoincrement and
autodecrement addressing, where the calculated address replaces the contents
of one of the registers used in forming the address.
4. Types and sizes of operands—Like most ISAs, 80x86, ARMv8, and RISC-V
support operand sizes of 8-bit (ASCII character), 16-bit (Unicode character
or half word), 32-bit (integer or word), 64-bit (double word or long integer),
and IEEE 754 floating point in 32-bit (single precision) and 64-bit (double
precision). The 80x86 also supports 80-bit floating point (extended double
precision).
5. Operations—The general categories of operations are data transfer, arithmetic
logical, control (discussed next), and floating point. RISC-V is a simple and
easy-to-pipeline instruction set architecture, and it is representative of the RISC
architectures being used in 2017. Figure 1.5 summarizes the integer RISC-V
ISA, and Figure 1.6 lists the floating-point ISA. The 80x86 has a much richer
and larger set of operations (see Appendix K).
6. Control flow instructions—Virtually all ISAs, including these three, support
conditional branches, unconditional jumps, procedure calls, and returns. All
three use PC-relative addressing, where the branch address is specified by an
address field that is added to the PC. There are some small differences.
RISC-V conditional branches (BE, BNE, etc.) test the contents of registers,
and the 80x86 and ARMv8 branches test condition code bits set as side effects
of arithmetic/logic operations. The ARMv8 and RISC-V procedure call places
the return address in a register, whereas the 80x86 call (CALLF) places the
return address on a stack in memory.
7. Encoding an ISA—There are two basic choices on encoding: fixed length and
variable length. All ARMv8 and RISC-V instructions are 32 bits long, which
simplifies instruction decoding. Figure 1.7 shows the RISC-V instruction for-
mats. The 80x86 encoding is variable length, ranging from 1 to 18 bytes.
Variable-length instructions can take less space than fixed-length instructions,
so a program compiled for the 80x86 is usually smaller than the same program
compiled for RISC-V. Note that choices mentioned previously will affect how
the instructions are encoded into a binary representation. For example, the num-
ber of registers and the number of addressing modes both have a significant
impact on the size of instructions, because the register field and addressing
mode field can appear many times in a single instruction. (Note that ARMv8
and RISC-V later offered extensions, called Thumb-2 and RV64IC, that
provide a mix of 16-bit and 32-bit length instructions, respectively, to reduce
program size. Code size for these compact versions of RISC architectures
are smaller than that of the 80x86. See Appendix K.)1.3
Defining Computer Architecture
■
15
Instruction type/opcodeInstruction meaning
Data transfersMove data between registers and memory, or between the integer and FP or special
registers; only memory address mode is 12-bit displacement + contents of a GPR
lb, lbu, sbLoad byte, load byte unsigned, store byte (to/from integer registers)
lh, lhu, shLoad half word, load half word unsigned, store half word (to/from integer registers)
lw, lwu, swLoad word, load word unsigned, store word (to/from integer registers)
ld, sdLoad double word, store double word (to/from integer registers)
flw, fld, fsw, fsdLoad SP float, load DP float, store SP float, store DP float
fmv._.x, fmv.x._Copy from/to integer register to/from floating-point register; “__” ¼ S for single-
precision, D for double-precision
csrrw, csrrwi, csrrs,
csrrsi, csrrc, csrrciRead counters and write status registers, which include counters: clock cycles, time,
instructions retired
Arithmetic/logicalOperations on integer or logical data in GPRs
add, addi, addw, addiwAdd, add immediate (all immediates are 12 bits), add 32-bits only & sign-extend to 64
bits, add immediate 32-bits only
sub, subwSubtract, subtract 32-bits only
mul, mulw, mulh, mulhsu,
mulhuMultiply, multiply 32-bits only, multiply upper half, multiply upper half signed-
unsigned, multiply upper half unsigned
div, divu, rem, remuDivide, divide unsigned, remainder, remainder unsigned
divw, divuw, remw, remuwDivide and remainder: as previously, but divide only lower 32-bits, producing 32-bit
sign-extended result
and, andiAnd, and immediate
or, ori, xor, xoriOr, or immediate, exclusive or, exclusive or immediate
luiLoad upper immediate; loads bits 31-12 of register with immediate, then sign-extends
auipcAdds immediate in bits 31–12 with zeros in lower bits to PC; used with JALR to
transfer control to any 32-bit address
sll, slli, srl, srli, sra,
sraiShifts: shift left logical, right logical, right arithmetic; both variable and immediate
forms
sllw, slliw, srlw, srliw,
sraw, sraiwShifts: as previously, but shift lower 32-bits, producing 32-bit sign-extended result
slt, slti, sltu, sltiuSet less than, set less than immediate, signed and unsigned
ControlConditional branches and jumps; PC-relative or through register
beq, bne, blt, bge, bltu,
bgeuBranch GPR equal/not equal; less than; greater than or equal, signed and unsigned
jal, jalrJump and link: save PC + 4, target is PC-relative (JAL) or a register (JALR); if specify
x0 as destination register, then acts as a simple jump
ecallMake a request to the supporting execution environment, which is usually an OS
ebreakDebuggers used to cause control to be transferred back to a debugging environment
fence, fence.iSynchronize threads to guarantee ordering of memory accesses; synchronize
instructions and data for stores to instruction memory
Figure 1.5 Subset of the instructions in RISC-V. RISC-V has a base set of instructions (R64I) and offers optional exten-
sions: multiply-divide (RVM), single-precision floating point (RVF), double-precision floating point (RVD). This figure
includes RVM and the next one shows RVF and RVD. Appendix A gives much more detail on RISC-V.16
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Instruction type/opcodeInstruction meaning
Floating pointFP operations on DP and SP formats
fadd.d, fadd.sAdd DP, SP numbers
fsub.d, fsub.sSubtract DP, SP numbers
fmul.d, fmul.sMultiply DP, SP floating point
fmadd.d, fmadd.s, fnmadd.d,
fnmadd.sMultiply-add DP, SP numbers; negative multiply-add DP, SP numbers
fmsub.d, fmsub.s, fnmsub.d,
fnmsub.sMultiply-sub DP, SP numbers; negative multiply-sub DP, SP numbers
fdiv.d, fdiv.sDivide DP, SP floating point
fsqrt.d, fsqrt.sSquare root DP, SP floating point
fmax.d, fmax.s, fmin.d,
fmin.sMaximum and minimum DP, SP floating point
fcvt._._, fcvt._._u,
fcvt._u._Convert instructions: FCVT.x.y converts from type x to type y, where x and y are
L (64-bit integer), W (32-bit integer), D (DP), or S (SP). Integers can be unsigned (U)
feq._, flt._,fle._Floating-point compare between floating-point registers and record the Boolean
result in integer register; “__” ¼ S for single-precision, D for double-precision
fclass.d, fclass.sWrites to integer register a 10-bit mask that indicates the class of the floating-point
number (#∞, +∞, #0, +0, NaN, …)
fsgnj._, fsgnjn._,
fsgnjx._Sign-injection instructions that changes only the sign bit: copy sign bit from other
source, the oppositive of sign bit of other source, XOR of the 2 sign bits
Figure 1.6 Floating point instructions for RISC-V. RISC-V has a base set of instructions (R64I) and offers optional
extensions for single-precision floating point (RVF) and double-precision floating point (RVD). SP ¼ single precision;
DP ¼ double precision.
31
25 24
funct7
20 19
rs2
imm [11:0]
15 14 12 11
76
0
rs1funct3rdopcode R-type
rs1funct3rdopcode I-type
imm [11:5]rs2rs1funct3imm [4:0]opcode S-type
imm [12] imm [10:5]rs2rs1funct3imm [4:1|11]opcode B-type
rdopcode U-type
rdopcode J-type
imm [31:12]
imm [20|10:1|11|19:12]
Figure 1.7 The base RISC-V instruction set architecture formats. All instructions are 32 bits long. The R format is for
integer register-to-register operations, such as ADD, SUB, and so on. The I format is for loads and immediate oper-
ations, such as LD and ADDI. The B format is for branches and the J format is for jumps and link. The S format is for
stores. Having a separate format for stores allows the three register specifiers (rd, rs1, rs2) to always be in the same
location in all formats. The U format is for the wide immediate instructions (LUI, AUIPC).1.3
Defining Computer Architecture
■
17
The other challenges facing the computer architect beyond ISA design are par-
ticularly acute at the present, when the differences among instruction sets are small
and when there are distinct application areas. Therefore, starting with the fourth
edition of this book, beyond this quick review, the bulk of the instruction set mate-
rial is found in the appendices (see Appendices A and K).
Genuine Computer Architecture: Designing the Organization
and Hardware to Meet Goals and Functional Requirements
The implementation of a computer has two components: organization and hard-
ware. The term organization includes the high-level aspects of a computer’s
design, such as the memory system, the memory interconnect, and the design of
the internal processor or CPU (central processing unit—where arithmetic, logic,
branching, and data transfer are implemented). The term microarchitecture is also
used instead of organization. For example, two processors with the same instruc-
tion set architectures but different organizations are the AMD Opteron and the Intel
Core i7. Both processors implement the 80 x86 instruction set, but they have very
different pipeline and cache organizations.
The switch to multiple processors per microprocessor led to the term core also
being used for processors. Instead of saying multiprocessor microprocessor, the
term multicore caught on. Given that virtually all chips have multiple processors,
the term central processing unit, or CPU, is fading in popularity.
Hardware refers to the specifics of a computer, including the detailed logic
design and the packaging technology of the computer. Often a line of computers
contains computers with identical instruction set architectures and very similar
organizations, but they differ in the detailed hardware implementation. For exam-
ple, the Intel Core i7 (see Chapter 3) and the Intel Xeon E7 (see Chapter 5) are
nearly identical but offer different clock rates and different memory systems, mak-
ing the Xeon E7 more effective for server computers.
In this book, the word architecture covers all three aspects of computer
design—instruction set architecture, organization or microarchitecture, and
hardware.
Computer architects must design a computer to meet functional requirements
as well as price, power, performance, and availability goals. Figure 1.8 summarizes
requirements to consider in designing a new computer. Often, architects also must
determine what the functional requirements are, which can be a major task. The
requirements may be specific features inspired by the market. Application software
typically drives the choice of certain functional requirements by determining how
the computer will be used. If a large body of software exists for a particular instruc-
tion set architecture, the architect may decide that a new computer should imple-
ment an existing instruction set. The presence of a large market for a particular
class of applications might encourage the designers to incorporate requirements
that would make the computer competitive in that market. Later chapters examine
many of these requirements and features in depth.18
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Functional requirements
Typical features required or supported
Application areaTarget of computer
Personal mobile deviceReal-time performance for a range of tasks, including interactive performance for
graphics, video, and audio; energy efficiency (Chapters 2–5 and 7; Appendix A)
General-purpose desktopBalanced performance for a range of tasks, including interactive performance for
graphics, video, and audio (Chapters 2–5; Appendix A)
ServersSupport for databases and transaction processing; enhancements for reliability and
availability; support for scalability (Chapters 2, 5, and 7; Appendices A, D, and F)
Clusters/warehouse-scale
computersThroughput performance for many independent tasks; error correction for memory;
energy proportionality (Chapters 2, 6, and 7; Appendix F)
Internet of things/embedded
computingOften requires special support for graphics or video (or other application-specific
extension); power limitations and power control may be required; real-time constraints
(Chapters 2, 3, 5, and 7; Appendices A and E)
Level of software compatibilityDetermines amount of existing software for computer
At programming languageMost flexible for designer; need new compiler (Chapters 3, 5, and 7; Appendix A)
Object code or binary
compatibleInstruction set architecture is completely defined—little flexibility—but no investment
needed in software or porting programs (Appendix A)
Operating system requirementsNecessary features to support chosen OS (Chapter 2; Appendix B)
Size of address spaceVery important feature (Chapter 2); may limit applications
Memory managementRequired for modern OS; may be paged or segmented (Chapter 2)
ProtectionDifferent OS and application needs: page versus segment; virtual machines (Chapter 2)
StandardsCertain standards may be required by marketplace
Floating pointFormat and arithmetic: IEEE 754 standard (Appendix J), special arithmetic for graphics
or signal processing
I/O interfacesFor I/O devices: Serial ATA, Serial Attached SCSI, PCI Express (Appendices D and F)
Operating systemsUNIX, Windows, Linux, CISCO IOS
NetworksSupport required for different networks: Ethernet, Infiniband (Appendix F)
Programming languagesLanguages (ANSI C, C++, Java, Fortran) affect instruction set (Appendix A)
Figure 1.8 Summary of some of the most important functional requirements an architect faces. The left-hand
column describes the class of requirement, while the right-hand column gives specific examples. The right-hand col-
umn also contains references to chapters and appendices that deal with the specific issues.
Architects must also be aware of important trends in both the technology and
the use of computers because such trends affect not only the future cost but also the
longevity of an architecture.
1.4
Trends in Technology
If an instruction set architecture is to prevail, it must be designed to survive rapid
changes in computer technology. After all, a successful new instruction set1.4
Trends in Technology
■
19
architecture may last decades—for example, the core of the IBM mainframe has
been in use for more than 50 years. An architect must plan for technology changes
that can increase the lifetime of a successful computer.
To plan for the evolution of a computer, the designer must be aware of rapid
changes in implementation technology. Five implementation technologies, which
change at a dramatic pace, are critical to modern implementations:
■Integrated circuit logic technology—Historically, transistor density increased
by about 35% per year, quadrupling somewhat over four years. Increases in
die size are less predictable and slower, ranging from 10% to 20% per year.
The combined effect was a traditional growth rate in transistor count on a chip
of about 40%–55% per year, or doubling every 18–24 months. This trend is
popularly known as Moore’s Law. Device speed scales more slowly, as we
discuss below. Shockingly, Moore’s Law is no more. The number of devices
per chip is still increasing, but at a decelerating rate. Unlike in the Moore’s
Law era, we expect the doubling time to be stretched with each new technol-
ogy generation.
■Semiconductor DRAM (dynamic random-access memory)—This technology
is the foundation of main memory, and we discuss it in Chapter 2. The growth
of DRAM has slowed dramatically, from quadrupling every three years as in
the past. The 8-gigabit DRAM was shipping in 2014, but the 16-gigabit
DRAM won’t reach that state until 2019, and it looks like there will be no
32-gigabit DRAM (Kim, 2005). Chapter 2 mentions several other technologies
that may replace DRAM when it hits its capacity wall.
■Semiconductor Flash (electrically erasable programmable read-only mem-
ory)—This nonvolatile semiconductor memory is the standard storage device
in PMDs, and its rapidly increasing popularity has fueled its rapid growth
rate in capacity. In recent years, the capacity per Flash chip increased by about
50%–60% per year, doubling roughly every 2 years. Currently, Flash
memory is 8–10 times cheaper per bit than DRAM. Chapter 2 describes Flash
memory.
■Magnetic disk technology—Prior to 1990, density increased by about 30% per
year, doubling in three years. It rose to 60% per year thereafter, and increased to
100% per year in 1996. Between 2004 and 2011, it dropped back to about 40%
per year, or doubled every two years. Recently, disk improvement has slowed
to less than 5% per year. One way to increase disk capacity is to add more plat-
ters at the same areal density, but there are already seven platters within the
one-inch depth of the 3.5-inch form factor disks. There is room for at most
one or two more platters. The last hope for real density increase is to use a small
laser on each disk read-write head to heat a 30 nm spot to 400°C so that it can
be written magnetically before it cools. It is unclear whether Heat Assisted
Magnetic Recording can be manufactured economically and reliably, although
Seagate announced plans to ship HAMR in limited production in 2018. HAMR
is the last chance for continued improvement in areal density of hard disk20
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
drives, which are now 8–10 times cheaper per bit than Flash and 200–300 times
cheaper per bit than DRAM. This technology is central to server- and
warehouse-scale storage, and we discuss the trends in detail in Appendix D.
■
Network technology—Network performance depends both on the performance
of switches and on the performance of the transmission system. We discuss the
trends in networking in Appendix F.
These rapidly changing technologies shape the design of a computer that, with
speed and technology enhancements, may have a lifetime of 3–5 years. Key tech-
nologies such as Flash change sufficiently that the designer must plan for these
changes. Indeed, designers often design for the next technology, knowing that,
when a product begins shipping in volume, the following technology may be
the most cost-effective or may have performance advantages. Traditionally, cost
has decreased at about the rate at which density increases.
Although technology improves continuously, the impact of these increases can
be in discrete leaps, as a threshold that allows a new capability is reached. For
example, when MOS technology reached a point in the early 1980s where between
25,000 and 50,000 transistors could fit on a single chip, it became possible to build
a single-chip, 32-bit microprocessor. By the late 1980s, first-level caches could go
on a chip. By eliminating chip crossings within the processor and between the pro-
cessor and the cache, a dramatic improvement in cost-performance and energy-
performance was possible. This design was simply unfeasible until the technology
reached a certain point. With multicore microprocessors and increasing numbers of
cores each generation, even server computers are increasingly headed toward a sin-
gle chip for all processors. Such technology thresholds are not rare and have a sig-
nificant impact on a wide variety of design decisions.
Performance Trends: Bandwidth Over Latency
As we shall see in Section 1.8, bandwidth or throughput is the total amount of work
done in a given time, such as megabytes per second for a disk transfer. In contrast,
latency or response time is the time between the start and the completion of an
event, such as milliseconds for a disk access. Figure 1.9 plots the relative improve-
ment in bandwidth and latency for technology milestones for microprocessors,
memory, networks, and disks. Figure 1.10 describes the examples and milestones
in more detail.
Performance is the primary differentiator for microprocessors and networks, so
they have seen the greatest gains: 32,000–40,000 # in bandwidth and 50–90# in
latency. Capacity is generally more important than performance for memory and
disks, so capacity has improved more, yet bandwidth advances of 400–2400 # are
still much greater than gains in latency of 8–9 #.
Clearly, bandwidth has outpaced latency across these technologies and will likely
continue to do so. A simple rule of thumb is that bandwidth grows by at least the
square of the improvement in latency. Computer designers should plan accordingly.1.4
Trends in Technology
■
21
100,000
Network
10,000
Relative bandwidth improvement
Microprocessor
1000
Memory
Disk
100
(Latency improvement
= Bandwidth improvement)
10
1
1
10
Relative Latency Improvement
100
Figure 1.9 Log-log plot of bandwidth and latency milestones in Figure 1.10 relative to the first milestone. Note
that latency improved 8–91 #, while bandwidth improved about 400–32,000 #. Except for networking, we note that
there were modest improvements in latency and bandwidth in the other three technologies in the six years since the
last edition: 0%–23% in latency and 23%–70% in bandwidth. Updated from Patterson, D., 2004. Latency lags band-
width. Commun. ACM 47 (10), 71–75.
Scaling of Transistor Performance and Wires
Integrated circuit processes are characterized by the feature size, which is the min-
imum size of a transistor or a wire in either the x or y dimension. Feature sizes
decreased from 10 μm in 1971 to 0.016 μm in 2017; in fact, we have switched
units, so production in 2017 is referred to as “16 nm,” and 7 nm chips are under-
way. Since the transistor count per square millimeter of silicon is determined by the
surface area of a transistor, the density of transistors increases quadratically with a
linear decrease in feature size.Out-of-order
3-way
superscalar
Multicore
Out-of-order
superpipelined, OOO 4-way
on chip L3
on-chip L2
cache, Turbo
cache
Microprocessor5-Stage
32-Bit
16-Bit
pipeline,
address/
address/
on-chip I & D
bus,
bus,
microcoded microcoded caches, FPU2-Way
superscalar,
64-bit bus
ProductIntel 80286 Intel 80386Intel Pentium Intel Pentium Pro Intel Pentium 4 Intel Core i7
Intel 80486
Year198219851989199319972001Die size (mm2)47438190308217122
134,000275,0001,200,0003,100,0005,500,00042,000,0001,750,000,000
Transistors
2015
Processors/chip1111114
Pins681321682733874231400
Latency (clocks)6555102214
Bus width (bits)163232646464196
Clock rate (MHz)12.516256620015004000
Bandwidth (MIPS)2625132600450064,000
31320076
Latency (ns)
Memory module
320
DRAM
Page mode
Fast page
Fast page
DRAM
mode DRAM mode DRAM
50154
Synchronous
DRAMDouble data
rate SDRAMDDR4
SDRAM
Module width (bits)16163264646464
Year1980198319861993199720002016
Mbits/DRAM chip0.060.25116642564096
Die size (mm2)35457013017020450
Pins/DRAM chip161618205466134
Bandwidth (MBytes/s)1340160267640160027,000
30
Latency (ns)
225170125756252
Local area networkEthernetFast
EthernetGigabit
Ethernet10 Gigabit
Ethernet100 Gigabit
Ethernet400 Gigabit
Ethernet
IEEE standard802.3803.3u802.3ab802.3ac802.3ba802.3bs
Year197819951999200320102017
Bandwidth (Mbits/seconds)10100100010,000100,000400,000
Latency (μs)300050034019010060
Hard disk3600 RPM5400 RPM7200 RPM10,000 RPM15,000 RPM15,000 RPM
ProductCDC WrenI
94145-36Seagate
ST41600Seagate
ST15150Seagate
ST39102Seagate
ST373453Seagate
ST600MX0062
Year198319901994199820032016
Capacity (GB)0.031.44.39.173.4600
Disk form factor5.25 in.5.25 in.3.5 in.3.5 in.3.5 in.3.5 in.
Media diameter5.25 in.5.25 in.3.5 in.3.0 in.2.5 in.2.5 in.
InterfaceST-412SCSISCSISCSISCSISAS
Bandwidth (MBytes/s)0.6492486250
Latency (ms)48.317.112.78.85.73.6
Figure 1.10 Performance milestones over 25–40 years for microprocessors, memory, networks, and disks. The
microprocessor milestones are several generations of IA-32 processors, going from a 16-bit bus, microcoded 80286 to
a 64-bit bus, multicore, out-of-order execution, superpipelined Core i7. Memory module milestones go from 16-bit-
wide, plain DRAM to 64-bit-wide double data rate version 3 synchronous DRAM. Ethernet advanced from 10 Mbits/s
to 400 Gbits/s. Disk milestones are based on rotation speed, improving from 3600 to 15,000 RPM. Each case is best-
case bandwidth, and latency is the time for a simple operation assuming no contention. Updated from Patterson, D.,
2004. Latency lags bandwidth. Commun. ACM 47 (10), 71–75.1.5
Trends in Power and Energy in Integrated Circuits
■
23
The increase in transistor performance, however, is more complex. As feature
sizes shrink, devices shrink quadratically in the horizontal dimension and also
shrink in the vertical dimension. The shrink in the vertical dimension requires a
reduction in operating voltage to maintain correct operation and reliability of the
transistors. This combination of scaling factors leads to a complex interrelationship
between transistor performance and process feature size. To a first approximation, in
the past the transistor performance improved linearly with decreasing feature size.
The fact that transistor count improves quadratically with a linear increase in tran-
sistor performance is both the challenge and the opportunity for which computer
architects were created! In the early days of microprocessors, the higher rate of
improvement in density was used to move quickly from 4-bit, to 8-bit, to 16-bit,
to 32-bit, to 64-bit microprocessors. More recently, density improvements have sup-
ported the introduction of multiple processors per chip, wider SIMD units, and many
of the innovations in speculative execution and caches found in Chapters 2–5.
Although transistors generally improve in performance with decreased feature
size, wires in an integrated circuit do not. In particular, the signal delay for a wire
increases in proportion to the product of its resistance and capacitance. Of course,
as feature size shrinks, wires get shorter, but the resistance and capacitance per unit
length get worse. This relationship is complex, since both resistance and capaci-
tance depend on detailed aspects of the process, the geometry of a wire, the loading
on a wire, and even the adjacency to other structures. There are occasional process
enhancements, such as the introduction of copper, which provide one-time
improvements in wire delay.
In general, however, wire delay scales poorly compared to transistor perfor-
mance, creating additional challenges for the designer. In addition to the power
dissipation limit, wire delay has become a major design obstacle for large inte-
grated circuits and is often more critical than transistor switching delay. Larger
and larger fractions of the clock cycle have been consumed by the propagation
delay of signals on wires, but power now plays an even greater role than wire delay.
1.5
Trends in Power and Energy in Integrated Circuits
Today, energy is the biggest challenge facing the computer designer for nearly
every class of computer. First, power must be brought in and distributed around
the chip, and modern microprocessors use hundreds of pins and multiple intercon-
nect layers just for power and ground. Second, power is dissipated as heat and must
be removed.
Power and Energy: A Systems Perspective
How should a system architect or a user think about performance, power, and
energy? From the viewpoint of a system designer, there are three primary concerns.
First, what is the maximum power a processor ever requires? Meeting this
demand can be important to ensuring correct operation. For example, if a processor24
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
attempts to draw more power than a power-supply system can provide (by drawing
more current than the system can supply), the result is typically a voltage drop,
which can cause devices to malfunction. Modern processors can vary widely in
power consumption with high peak currents; hence they provide voltage indexing
methods that allow the processor to slow down and regulate voltage within a wider
margin. Obviously, doing so decreases performance.
Second, what is the sustained power consumption? This metric is widely called
the thermal design power (TDP) because it determines the cooling requirement.
TDP is neither peak power, which is often 1.5 times higher, nor is it the actual aver-
age power that will be consumed during a given computation, which is likely to be
lower still. A typical power supply for a system is typically sized to exceed the
TDP, and a cooling system is usually designed to match or exceed TDP. Failure
to provide adequate cooling will allow the junction temperature in the processor to
exceed its maximum value, resulting in device failure and possibly permanent
damage. Modern processors provide two features to assist in managing heat, since
the highest power (and hence heat and temperature rise) can exceed the long-term
average specified by the TDP. First, as the thermal temperature approaches the
junction temperature limit, circuitry lowers the clock rate, thereby reducing power.
Should this technique not be successful, a second thermal overload trap is activated
to power down the chip.
The third factor that designers and users need to consider is energy and energy
efficiency. Recall that power is simply energy per unit time: 1 watt ¼ 1 joule per
second. Which metric is the right one for comparing processors: energy or power?
In general, energy is always a better metric because it is tied to a specific task and
the time required for that task. In particular, the energy to complete a workload is
equal to the average power times the execution time for the workload.
Thus, if we want to know which of two processors is more efficient for a given
task, we need to compare energy consumption (not power) for executing the task.
For example, processor A may have a 20% higher average power consumption
than processor B, but if A executes the task in only 70% of the time needed by
B, its energy consumption will be 1.2 # 0.7 ¼ 0.84, which is clearly better.
One might argue that in a large server or cloud, it is sufficient to consider the
average power, since the workload is often assumed to be infinite, but this is mis-
leading. If our cloud were populated with processor Bs rather than As, then the
cloud would do less work for the same amount of energy expended. Using energy
to compare the alternatives avoids this pitfall. Whenever we have a fixed workload,
whether for a warehouse-size cloud or a smartphone, comparing energy will be the
right way to compare computer alternatives, because the electricity bill for the
cloud and the battery lifetime for the smartphone are both determined by the energy
consumed.
When is power consumption a useful measure? The primary legitimate use is as
a constraint: for example, an air-cooled chip might be limited to 100 W. It can be
used as a metric if the workload is fixed, but then it’s just a variation of the true
metric of energy per task.1.5
Trends in Power and Energy in Integrated Circuits
■
25
Energy and Power Within a Microprocessor
For CMOS chips, the traditional primary energy consumption has been in switch-
ing transistors, also called dynamic energy. The energy required per transistor is
proportional to the product of the capacitive load driven by the transistor and
the square of the voltage:
Energydynamic / Capacitive load # Voltage2
This equation is the energy of pulse of the logic transition of 0 ! 1 ! 0 or
1 ! 0 ! 1. The energy of a single transition (0 ! 1 or 1 ! 0) is then:
Energydynamic / 1=2 # Capacitive load # Voltage2
The power required per transistor is just the product of the energy of a transition
multiplied by the frequency of transitions:
Powerdynamic / 1=2 # Capacitive load # Voltage2 # Frequency switched
For a fixed task, slowing clock rate reduces power, but not energy.
Clearly, dynamic power and energy are greatly reduced by lowering the volt-
age, so voltages have dropped from 5 V to just under 1 V in 20 years. The capac-
itive load is a function of the number of transistors connected to an output and the
technology, which determines the capacitance of the wires and the transistors.
ExampleSome microprocessors today are designed to have adjustable voltage, so a 15%
reduction in voltage may result in a 15% reduction in frequency. What would
be the impact on dynamic energy and on dynamic power?
AnswerBecause the capacitance is unchanged, the answer for energy is the ratio of the
voltages
Energynew ðVoltage # 0:85Þ2
¼
¼ 0:852 ¼ 0:72
Energyold
Voltage2
which reduces energy to about 72% of the original. For power, we add the ratio of
the frequencies
Powernew
ðFrequency switched # 0:85Þ
¼ 0:72 #
¼ 0:61
Powerold
Frequency switched
shrinking power to about 61% of the original.
As we move from one process to the next, the increase in the number of tran-
sistors switching and the frequency with which they change dominate the decrease
in load capacitance and voltage, leading to an overall growth in power consump-
tion and energy. The first microprocessors consumed less than a watt, and the first26
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
32-bit microprocessors (such as the Intel 80386) used about 2 W, whereas a
4.0 GHz Intel Core i7-6700K consumes 95 W. Given that this heat must be dissi-
pated from a chip that is about 1.5 cm on a side, we are near the limit of what can be
cooled by air, and this is where we have been stuck for nearly a decade.
Given the preceding equation, you would expect clock frequency growth to
slow down if we can’t reduce voltage or increase power per chip. Figure 1.11
shows that this has indeed been the case since 2003, even for the microprocessors
in Figure 1.1 that were the highest performers each year. Note that this period of
flatter clock rates corresponds to the period of slow performance improvement
range in Figure 1.1.
Distributing the power, removing the heat, and preventing hot spots have
become increasingly difficult challenges. Energy is now the major constraint to
using transistors; in the past, it was the raw silicon area. Therefore modern
10,000
Intel Pentium4 Xeon
3200 MHz in 2003
Intel Pentium III
1000 MHz in 2000
Clock rate (MHz)
1000
Intel Skylake Core i7
4200 MHz in 2017
2%/year
Digital Alpha 21164A
500 MHz in 1996
Digital Alpha 21064
150 MHz in 1992
40%/year
100
MIPS M2000
25 MHz in 1989
Sun-4 SPARC
16.7 MHz in 1986
10
Digital VAX-11/780
5 MHz in 1978
15%/year
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10
20
12
20
14
20
16
20
18
1
Figure 1.11 Growth in clock rate of microprocessors in Figure 1.1. Between 1978 and 1986, the clock rate improved
less than 15% per year while performance improved by 22% per year. During the “renaissance period” of 52% per-
formance improvement per year between 1986 and 2003, clock rates shot up almost 40% per year. Since then, the
clock rate has been nearly flat, growing at less than 2% per year, while single processor performance improved
recently at just 3.5% per year.1.5
Trends in Power and Energy in Integrated Circuits
■
27
microprocessors offer many techniques to try to improve energy efficiency despite
flat clock rates and constant supply voltages:
1. Do nothing well. Most microprocessors today turn off the clock of inactive
modules to save energy and dynamic power. For example, if no floating-point
instructions are executing, the clock of the floating-point unit is disabled. If
some cores are idle, their clocks are stopped.
2. Dynamic voltage-frequency scaling (DVFS). The second technique comes
directly from the preceding formulas. PMDs, laptops, and even servers have
periods of low activity where there is no need to operate at the highest clock
frequency and voltages. Modern microprocessors typically offer a few clock
frequencies and voltages in which to operate that use lower power and energy.
Figure 1.12 plots the potential power savings via DVFS for a server as the work-
load shrinks for three different clock rates: 2.4, 1.8, and 1 GHz. The overall
server power savings is about 10%–15% for each of the two steps.
3. Design for the typical case. Given that PMDs and laptops are often idle, mem-
ory and storage offer low power modes to save energy. For example, DRAMs
have a series of increasingly lower power modes to extend battery life in PMDs
and laptops, and there have been proposals for disks that have a mode that spins
more slowly when unused to save power. However, you cannot access DRAMs
or disks in these modes, so you must return to fully active mode to read or write,
no matter how low the access rate. As mentioned, microprocessors for PCs have
been designed instead for heavy use at high operating temperatures, relying on
on-chip temperature sensors to detect when activity should be reduced automat-
ically to avoid overheating. This “emergency slowdown” allows manufacturers
to design for a more typical case and then rely on this safety mechanism if some-
one really does run programs that consume much more power than is typical.
Power (% of peak)
100
2.4 GHz
1.8 GHz
80
1 GHz
60
40
20
DVS savings (%)
0
Idle
7
14
21
29
36 43 50 57 64
Compute load (%)
71
79
86
93 100
Figure 1.12 Energy savings for a server using an AMD Opteron microprocessor, 8 GB
of DRAM, and one ATA disk. At 1.8 GHz, the server can handle at most up to two-thirds
of the workload without causing service-level violations, and at 1 GHz, it can safely han-
€lzle, 2009).
dle only one-third of the workload (Figure 5.11 in Barroso and Ho28
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
4. Overclocking. Intel started offering Turbo mode in 2008, where the chip decides
that it is safe to run at a higher clock rate for a short time, possibly on just a few
cores, until temperature starts to rise. For example, the 3.3 GHz Core i7 can run
in short bursts for 3.6 GHz. Indeed, the highest-performing microprocessors
each year since 2008 shown in Figure 1.1 have all offered temporary overclock-
ing of about 10% over the nominal clock rate. For single-threaded code, these
microprocessors can turn off all cores but one and run it faster. Note that,
although the operating system can turn off Turbo mode, there is no notification
once it is enabled, so the programmers may be surprised to see their programs
vary in performance because of room temperature!
Although dynamic power is traditionally thought of as the primary source of
power dissipation in CMOS, static power is becoming an important issue because
leakage current flows even when a transistor is off:
Powerstatic / Currentstatic # Voltage
That is, static power is proportional to the number of devices.
Thus increasing the number of transistors increases power even if they are idle,
and current leakage increases in processors with smaller transistor sizes. As a
result, very low-power systems are even turning off the power supply (power gat-
ing) to inactive modules in order to control loss because of leakage. In 2011 the
goal for leakage was 25% of the total power consumption, with leakage in
high-performance designs sometimes far exceeding that goal. Leakage can be as
high as 50% for such chips, in part because of the large SRAM caches that need
power to maintain the storage values. (The S in SRAM is for static.) The only hope
to stop leakage is to turn off power to the chips’ subsets.
Finally, because the processor is just a portion of the whole energy cost of a sys-
tem, it can make sense to use a faster, less energy-efficient processor to allow the rest
of the system to go into a sleep mode. This strategy is known as race-to-halt.
The importance of power and energy has increased the scrutiny on the effi-
ciency of an innovation, so the primary evaluation now is tasks per joule or per-
formance per watt, contrary to performance per mm2 of silicon as in the past. This
new metric affects approaches to parallelism, as we will see in Chapters 4 and 5.
The Shift in Computer Architecture Because of Limits of Energy
As transistor improvement decelerates, computer architects must look elsewhere
for improved energy efficiency. Indeed, given the energy budget, it is easy today
to design a microprocessor with so many transistors that they cannot all be turned
on at the same time. This phenomenon has been called dark silicon, in that much of
a chip cannot be unused (“dark”) at any moment in time because of thermal con-
straints. This observation has led architects to reexamine the fundamentals of pro-
cessors’ design in the search for a greater energy-cost performance.
Figure 1.13, which lists the energy cost and area cost of the building blocks of
a modern computer, reveals surprisingly large ratios. For example, a 32-bit1.6
Trends in Cost
Relative energy cost
29
Relative area cost
Energy (pJ)Area (µm2)
8b Add0.0336
16b Add32b Add0.05
0.1137
16b FB Add0.41360
32b FB Add0.94184
8b Mult0.2282
32b Mult3.13495
16b FB Mult1.1
3.71640
32b FB Mult32b SRAM Read (8KB)5N/A
32b DRAM Read640N/A
Operation:
■
67
7700
1
10
100
1000
10000
1
10
100
1000
Energy numbers are from Mark Horowitz *Computing’s Energy problem (and what we can do about it)*. ISSCC 2014
Area numbers are from synthesized result using Design compiler under TSMC 45nm tech node. FP units used DesignWare Library.
Figure 1.13 Comparison of the energy and die area of arithmetic operations and energy cost of accesses to SRAM
and DRAM. [Azizi][Dally]. Area is for TSMC 45 nm technology node.
floating-point addition uses 30 times as much energy as an 8-bit integer add. The
area difference is even larger, by 60 times. However, the biggest difference is in
memory; a 32-bit DRAM access takes 20,000 times as much energy as an 8-bit
addition. A small SRAM is 125 times more energy-efficient than DRAM, which
demonstrates the importance of careful uses of caches and memory buffers.
The new design principle of minimizing energy per task combined with the
relative energy and area costs in Figure 1.13 have inspired a new direction for com-
puter architecture, which we describe in Chapter 7. Domain-specific processors
save energy by reducing wide floating-point operations and deploying special-pur-
pose memories to reduce accesses to DRAM. They use those saving to provide
10–100 more (narrower) integer arithmetic units than a traditional processor.
Although such processors perform only a limited set of tasks, they perform them
remarkably faster and more energy efficiently than a general-purpose processor.
Like a hospital with general practitioners and medical specialists, computers in
this energy-aware world will likely be combinations of general-purpose cores that
can perform any task and special-purpose cores that do a few things extremely well
and even more cheaply.
1.6
Trends in Cost
Although costs tend to be less important in some computer designs—specifically
supercomputers—cost-sensitive designs are of growing significance. Indeed, in
the past 35 years, the use of technology improvements to lower cost, as well as
increase performance, has been a major theme in the computer industry.30
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Textbooks often ignore the cost half of cost-performance because costs change,
thereby dating books, and because the issues are subtle and differ across industry
segments. Nevertheless, it’s essential for computer architects to have an under-
standing of cost and its factors in order to make intelligent decisions about whether
a new feature should be included in designs where cost is an issue. (Imagine archi-
tects designing skyscrapers without any information on costs of steel beams and
concrete!)
This section discusses the major factors that influence the cost of a computer
and how these factors are changing over time.
The Impact of Time, Volume, and Commoditization
The cost of a manufactured computer component decreases over time even without
significant improvements in the basic implementation technology. The underlying
principle that drives costs down is the learning curve—manufacturing costs
decrease over time. The learning curve itself is best measured by change in
yield—the percentage of manufactured devices that survives the testing procedure.
Whether it is a chip, a board, or a system, designs that have twice the yield will have
half the cost.
Understanding how the learning curve improves yield is critical to projecting
costs over a product’s life. One example is that the price per megabyte of DRAM
has dropped over the long term. Since DRAMs tend to be priced in close relation-
ship to cost—except for periods when there is a shortage or an oversupply—price
and cost of DRAM track closely.
Microprocessor prices also drop over time, but because they are less standard-
ized than DRAMs, the relationship between price and cost is more complex. In a
period of significant competition, price tends to track cost closely, although micro-
processor vendors probably rarely sell at a loss.
Volume is a second key factor in determining cost. Increasing volumes affect
cost in several ways. First, they decrease the time needed to get through the learn-
ing curve, which is partly proportional to the number of systems (or chips) man-
ufactured. Second, volume decreases cost because it increases purchasing and
manufacturing efficiency. As a rule of thumb, some designers have estimated that
costs decrease about 10% for each doubling of volume. Moreover, volume
decreases the amount of development costs that must be amortized by each com-
puter, thus allowing cost and selling price to be closer and still make a profit.
Commodities are products that are sold by multiple vendors in large volumes
and are essentially identical. Virtually all the products sold on the shelves of gro-
cery stores are commodities, as are standard DRAMs, Flash memory, monitors,
and keyboards. In the past 30 years, much of the personal computer industry
has become a commodity business focused on building desktop and laptop com-
puters running Microsoft Windows.
Because many vendors ship virtually identical products, the market is highly
competitive. Of course, this competition decreases the gap between cost and selling1.6
Trends in Cost
■
31
price, but it also decreases cost. Reductions occur because a commodity market has
both volume and a clear product definition, which allows multiple suppliers to
compete in building components for the commodity product. As a result, the over-
all product cost is lower because of the competition among the suppliers of the
components and the volume efficiencies the suppliers can achieve. This rivalry
has led to the low end of the computer business being able to achieve better
price-performance than other sectors and has yielded greater growth at the low
end, although with very limited profits (as is typical in any commodity business).
Cost of an Integrated Circuit
Why would a computer architecture book have a section on integrated circuit
costs? In an increasingly competitive computer marketplace where standard
parts—disks, Flash memory, DRAMs, and so on—are becoming a significant por-
tion of any system’s cost, integrated circuit costs are becoming a greater portion of
the cost that varies between computers, especially in the high-volume, cost-
sensitive portion of the market. Indeed, with PMDs’ increasing reliance of whole
systems on a chip (SOC), the cost of the integrated circuits is much of the cost of the
PMD. Thus computer designers must understand the costs of chips in order to
understand the costs of current computers.
Although the costs of integrated circuits have dropped exponentially, the basic
process of silicon manufacture is unchanged: A wafer is still tested and chopped
into dies that are packaged (see Figures 1.14–1.16). Therefore the cost of a pack-
aged integrated circuit is
Cost of integrated circuit ¼
Cost of die + Cost of testing die + Cost of packaging and final test
Final test yield
In this section, we focus on the cost of dies, summarizing the key issues in testing
and packaging at the end.
Learning how to predict the number of good chips per wafer requires first learn-
ing how many dies fit on a wafer and then learning how to predict the percentage of
those that will work. From there it is simple to predict cost:
Cost of die ¼
Cost of wafer
Dies per wafer # Die yield
The most interesting feature of this initial term of the chip cost equation is its sen-
sitivity to die size, shown below.
The number of dies per wafer is approximately the area of the wafer divided by
the area of the die. It can be more accurately estimated by
Dies per wafer ¼
π # ðWafer diameter=2Þ2 π # Wafer diameter
# pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Die area
2 # Die area
The first term is the ratio of wafer area (πr2) to die area. The second compensates
for the “square peg in a round hole” problem—rectangular dies near the periphery32
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Figure 1.14 Photograph of an Intel Skylake microprocessor die, which is evaluated
in Chapter 4.
CoreCoreCoreCoreCoreCore
Memory
ControllerCoreCoreCoreCoreMemory
Controller
CoreCoreCoreCoreCoreCore
CoreCoreCoreCoreCoreCore
CoreCoreCoreCoreCoreCore
DDRIO
DDRIO
3x Intel® UPI, 3x16 PCIe Gen3, 1x4 DMI3
Figure 1.15 The components of the microprocessor die in Figure 1.14 are labeled with their functions.1.6
Trends in Cost
■
33
Figure 1.16 This 200 mm diameter wafer of RISC-V dies was designed by SiFive. It has
two types of RISC-V dies using an older, larger processing line. An FE310 die is 2.65
mm # 2.72 mm and an SiFive test die that is 2.89 mm # 2.72 mm. The wafer contains
1846 of the former and 1866 of the latter, totaling 3712 chips.
of round wafers. Dividing the circumference (πd) by the diagonal of a square die is
approximately the number of dies along the edge.
Example
Answer
Find the number of dies per 300 mm (30 cm) wafer for a die that is 1.5 cm on a side
and for a die that is 1.0 cm on a side.
When die area is 2.25 cm2:
Dies per wafer ¼
π # ð30=2Þ2
π # 30
706:9 94:2
#
¼ 270
# pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ¼
2:25
2 # 2:25 2:25 2:12
Because the area of the larger die is 2.25 times bigger, there are roughly 2.25 as
many smaller dies per wafer:
Dies per wafer ¼
π # ð30=2Þ2
π # 30
706:9 94:2
#
¼ 640
# pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ¼
1:00
2 # 1:00 1:00 1:41
However, this formula gives only the maximum number of dies per wafer. The
critical question is: What is the fraction of good dies on a wafer, or the die yield? A
simple model of integrated circuit yield, which assumes that defects are randomly34
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
distributed over the wafer and that yield is inversely proportional to the complexity
of the fabrication process, leads to the following:
Die yield ¼ Wafer yield # 1=ð1 + Defects per unit area # Die areaÞN
This Bose-Einstein formula is an empirical model developed by looking at the
yield of many manufacturing lines (Sydow, 2006), and it still applies today. Wafer
yield accounts for wafers that are completely bad and so need not be tested. For
simplicity, we’ll just assume the wafer yield is 100%. Defects per unit area is a
measure of the random manufacturing defects that occur. In 2017 the value was
typically 0.08–0.10 defects per square inch for a 28-nm node and 0.10–0.30 for
the newer 16 nm node because it depends on the maturity of the process (recall
the learning curve mentioned earlier). The metric versions are 0.012–0.016 defects
per square centimeter for 28 nm and 0.016–0.047 for 16 nm. Finally, N is a
parameter called the process-complexity factor, a measure of manufacturing
difficulty. For 28 nm processes in 2017, N is 7.5–9.5. For a 16 nm process,
N ranges from 10 to 14.
Example
Answer
Find the die yield for dies that are 1.5 cm on a side and 1.0 cm on a side, assuming a
defect density of 0.047 per cm2 and N is 12.
The total die areas are 2.25 and 1.00 cm2. For the larger die, the yield is
Die yield ¼ 1=ð1 + 0:047 # 2:25Þ12 # 270 ¼ 120
For the smaller die, the yield is
Die yield ¼ 1=ð1 + 0:047 # 1:00Þ12 # 640 ¼ 444
The bottom line is the number of good dies per wafer. Less than half of all the large
dies are good, but nearly 70% of the small dies are good.
Although many microprocessors fall between 1.00 and 2.25 cm2, low-end
embedded 32-bit processors are sometimes as small as 0.05 cm2, processors used
for embedded control (for inexpensive IoT devices) are often less than 0.01 cm2,
and high-end server and GPU chips can be as large as 8 cm2.
Given the tremendous price pressures on commodity products such as DRAM
and SRAM, designers have included redundancy as a way to raise yield. For a
number of years, DRAMs have regularly included some redundant memory cells
so that a certain number of flaws can be accommodated. Designers have used sim-
ilar techniques in both standard SRAMs and in large SRAM arrays used for caches
within microprocessors. GPUs have 4 redundant processors out of 84 for the same
reason. Obviously, the presence of redundant entries can be used to boost the yield
significantly.1.6
Trends in Cost
■
35
In 2017 processing of a 300 mm (12-inch) diameter wafer in a 28-nm technol-
ogy costs between $4000 and $5000, and a 16-nm wafer costs about $7000.
Assuming a processed wafer cost of $7000, the cost of the 1.00 cm2 die would
be around $16, but the cost per die of the 2.25 cm2 die would be about $58, or
almost four times the cost of a die that is a little over twice as large.
What should a computer designer remember about chip costs? The manufactur-
ing process dictates the wafer cost, wafer yield, and defects per unit area, so the sole
control of the designer is die area. In practice, because the number of defects per
unit area is small, the number of good dies per wafer, and therefore the cost per die,
grows roughly as the square of the die area. The computer designer affects die size,
and thus cost, both by what functions are included on or excluded from the die and
by the number of I/O pins.
Before we have a part that is ready for use in a computer, the die must be tested
(to separate the good dies from the bad), packaged, and tested again after packag-
ing. These steps all add significant costs, increasing the total by half.
The preceding analysis focused on the variable costs of producing a functional
die, which is appropriate for high-volume integrated circuits. There is, however,
one very important part of the fixed costs that can significantly affect the cost
of an integrated circuit for low volumes (less than 1 million parts), namely, the cost
of a mask set. Each step in the integrated circuit process requires a separate mask.
Therefore, for modern high-density fabrication processes with up to 10 metal
layers, mask costs are about $4 million for 16 nm and $1.5 million for 28 nm.
The good news is that semiconductor companies offer “shuttle runs” to dramat-
ically lower the costs of tiny test chips. They lower costs by putting many small
designs onto a single die to amortize the mask costs, and then later split the dies
into smaller pieces for each project. Thus TSMC delivers 80–100 untested dies that
are 1.57 # 1.57 mm in a 28 nm process for $30,000 in 2017. Although these die are
tiny, they offer the architect millions of transistors to play with. For example, sev-
eral RISC-V processors would fit on such a die.
Although shuttle runs help with prototyping and debugging runs, they don’t
address small-volume production of tens to hundreds of thousands of parts.
Because mask costs are likely to continue to increase, some designers are incorpo-
rating reconfigurable logic to enhance the flexibility of a part and thus reduce the
cost implications of masks.
Cost Versus Price
With the commoditization of computers, the margin between the cost to manufac-
ture a product and the price the product sells for has been shrinking. Those margins
pay for a company’s research and development (R&D), marketing, sales,
manufacturing equipment maintenance, building rental, cost of financing, pretax
profits, and taxes. Many engineers are surprised to find that most companies spend
only 4% (in the commodity PC business) to 12% (in the high-end server business)
of their income on R&D, which includes all engineering.36
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Cost of Manufacturing Versus Cost of Operation
For the first four editions of this book, cost meant the cost to build a computer and
price meant price to purchase a computer. With the advent of WSCs, which contain
tens of thousands of servers, the cost to operate the computers is significant in addi-
tion to the cost of purchase. Economists refer to these two costs as capital expenses
(CAPEX) and operational expenses (OPEX).
As Chapter 6 shows, the amortized purchase price of servers and networks
is about half of the monthly cost to operate a WSC, assuming a short lifetime
of the IT equipment of 3–4 years. About 40% of the monthly operational costs
are for power use and the amortized infrastructure to distribute power and to cool
the IT equipment, despite this infrastructure being amortized over 10–15 years.
Thus, to lower operational costs in a WSC, computer architects need to use energy
efficiently.
1.7
Dependability
Historically, integrated circuits were one of the most reliable components of a com-
puter. Although their pins may be vulnerable, and faults may occur over commu-
nication channels, the failure rate inside the chip was very low. That conventional
wisdom is changing as we head to feature sizes of 16 nm and smaller, because both
transient faults and permanent faults are becoming more commonplace, so archi-
tects must design systems to cope with these challenges. This section gives a quick
overview of the issues in dependability, leaving the official definition of the terms
and approaches to Section D.3 in Appendix D.
Computers are designed and constructed at different layers of abstraction. We
can descend recursively down through a computer seeing components enlarge
themselves to full subsystems until we run into individual transistors. Although
some faults are widespread, like the loss of power, many can be limited to a single
component in a module. Thus utter failure of a module at one level may be con-
sidered merely a component error in a higher-level module. This distinction is
helpful in trying to find ways to build dependable computers.
One difficult question is deciding when a system is operating properly. This
theoretical point became concrete with the popularity of Internet services. Infra-
structure providers started offering service level agreements (SLAs) or service
level objectives (SLOs) to guarantee that their networking or power service would
be dependable. For example, they would pay the customer a penalty if they did not
meet an agreement of some hours per month. Thus an SLA could be used to decide
whether the system was up or down.
Systems alternate between two states of service with respect to an SLA:
1. Service accomplishment, where the service is delivered as specified.
2. Service interruption, where the delivered service is different from the SLA.1.7
Dependability
■
37
Transitions between these two states are caused by failures (from state 1 to state 2)
or restorations (2 to 1). Quantifying these transitions leads to the two main mea-
sures of dependability:
■Module reliability is a measure of the continuous service accomplishment (or,
equivalently, of the time to failure) from a reference initial instant. Therefore the
mean time to failure (MTTF) is a reliability measure. The reciprocal of MTTF is
a rate of failures, generally reported as failures per billion hours of operation, or
FIT (for failures in time). Thus an MTTF of 1,000,000 hours equals 109/106 or
1000 FIT. Service interruption is measured as mean time to repair (MTTR).
Mean time between failures (MTBF) is simply the sum of MTTF + MTTR.
Although MTBF is widely used, MTTF is often the more appropriate term. If
a collection of modules has exponentially distributed lifetimes—meaning that
the age of a module is not important in probability of failure—the overall failure
rate of the collection is the sum of the failure rates of the modules.
■Module availability is a measure of the service accomplishment with respect to
the alternation between the two states of accomplishment and interruption. For
nonredundant systems with repair, module availability is
Module availability ¼
MTTF
ðMTTF + MTTRÞ
Note that reliability and availability are now quantifiable metrics, rather than syn-
onyms for dependability. From these definitions, we can estimate reliability of a
system quantitatively if we make some assumptions about the reliability of com-
ponents and that failures are independent.
Example
Assume a disk subsystem with the following components and MTTF:
■10 disks, each rated at 1,000,000-hour MTTF
■1 ATA controller, 500,000-hour MTTF
■1 power supply, 200,000-hour MTTF
■1 fan, 200,000-hour MTTF
■1 ATA cable, 1,000,000-hour MTTF
Using the simplifying assumptions that the lifetimes are exponentially distributed
and that failures are independent, compute the MTTF of the system as a whole.
Answer
The sum of the failure rates is
Failure ratesystem ¼ 10 #
¼
1
1
1
1
1
+
+
+
+
1,000, 000 500, 000 200, 000 200, 000 1, 000,000
10 + 2 + 5 + 5 + 1
23
23, 000
¼
¼
1,000, 000 hours 1,000, 000 1,000, 000,000 hours38
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
or 23,000 FIT. The MTTF for the system is just the inverse of the failure rate
MTTFsystem ¼
1
1,000, 000, 000 hours
¼ 43,500 hours
¼
Failure ratesystem
23, 000
or just under 5 years.
The primary way to cope with failure is redundancy, either in time (repeat the
operation to see if it still is erroneous) or in resources (have other components to
take over from the one that failed). Once the component is replaced and the system
is fully repaired, the dependability of the system is assumed to be as good as new.
Let’s quantify the benefits of redundancy with an example.
ExampleDisk subsystems often have redundant power supplies to improve dependability.
Using the preceding components and MTTFs, calculate the reliability of redundant
power supplies. Assume that one power supply is sufficient to run the disk subsys-
tem and that we are adding one redundant power supply.
AnswerWe need a formula to show what to expect when we can tolerate a failure and still
provide service. To simplify the calculations, we assume that the lifetimes of the
components are exponentially distributed and that there is no dependency between
the component failures. MTTF for our redundant power supplies is the mean time
until one power supply fails divided by the chance that the other will fail before the
first one is replaced. Thus, if the chance of a second failure before repair is small,
then the MTTF of the pair is large.
Since we have two power supplies and independent failures, the mean time until
one supply fails is MTTFpower supply/2. A good approximation of the probability of
a second failure is MTTR over the mean time until the other power supply fails.
Therefore a reasonable approximation for a redundant pair of power supplies is
MTTFpower supply pair ¼
2
MTTF2power supply
MTTFpower supply =2 MTTFpower supply =2
¼
¼
MTTRpower supply
MTTRpower supply
2 # MTTRpower supply
MTTFpower supply
Using the preceding MTTF numbers, if we assume it takes on average 24 hours for
a human operator to notice that a power supply has failed and to replace it, the reli-
ability of the fault tolerant pair of power supplies is
MTTFpower supply pair ¼
MTTF2power supply
200, 0002
ﬃ 830,000, 000
¼
2 # MTTRpower supply
2 # 24
making the pair about 4150 times more reliable than a single power supply.
Having quantified the cost, power, and dependability of computer technology, we
are ready to quantify performance.1.8
1.8
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
■
39
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
When we say one computer is faster than another one is, what do we mean? The
user of a cell phone may say a computer is faster when a program runs in less time,
while an Amazon.com administrator may say a computer is faster when it com-
pletes more transactions per hour. The cell phone user wants to reduce response
time—the time between the start and the completion of an event—also referred
to as execution time. The operator of a WSC wants to increase throughput—the
total amount of work done in a given time.
In comparing design alternatives, we often want to relate the performance of
two different computers, say, X and Y. The phrase “X is faster than Y” is used
here to mean that the response time or execution time is lower on X than on Y
for the given task. In particular, “X is n times as fast as Y” will mean
Execution timeY
¼n
Execution timeX
Since execution time is the reciprocal of performance, the following relationship
holds:
1
Execution timeY PerformanceY PerformanceX
n¼
¼
¼
1
Execution timeX
PerformanceY
PerformanceX
The phrase “the throughput of X is 1.3 times as fast as Y” signifies here that the
number of tasks completed per unit time on computer X is 1.3 times the number
completed on Y.
Unfortunately, time is not always the metric quoted in comparing the perfor-
mance of computers. Our position is that the only consistent and reliable measure
of performance is the execution time of real programs, and that all proposed alter-
natives to time as the metric or to real programs as the items measured have even-
tually led to misleading claims or even mistakes in computer design.
Even execution time can be defined in different ways depending on what we
count. The most straightforward definition of time is called wall-clock time,
response time, or elapsed time, which is the latency to complete a task, including
storage accesses, memory accesses, input/output activities, operating system over-
head—everything. With multiprogramming, the processor works on another pro-
gram while waiting for I/O and may not necessarily minimize the elapsed time of
one program. Thus we need a term to consider this activity. CPU time recognizes
this distinction and means the time the processor is computing, not including the
time waiting for I/O or running other programs. (Clearly, the response time seen by
the user is the elapsed time of the program, not the CPU time.)
Computer users who routinely run the same programs would be the perfect can-
didates to evaluate a new computer. To evaluate a new system, these users would
simply compare the execution time of their workloads—the mixture of programs40
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
and operating system commands that users run on a computer. Few are in this
happy situation, however. Most must rely on other methods to evaluate computers,
and often other evaluators, hoping that these methods will predict performance for
their usage of the new computer. One approach is benchmark programs, which are
programs that many companies use to establish the relative performance of their
computers.
Benchmarks
The best choice of benchmarks to measure performance is real applications, such as
Google Translate mentioned in Section 1.1. Attempts at running programs that are
much simpler than a real application have led to performance pitfalls. Examples
include
■Kernels, which are small, key pieces of real applications.
■Toy programs, which are 100-line programs from beginning programming
assignments, such as Quicksort.
■Synthetic benchmarks, which are fake programs invented to try to match the
profile and behavior of real applications, such as Dhrystone.
All three are discredited today, usually because the compiler writer and architect
can conspire to make the computer appear faster on these stand-in programs than
on real applications. Regrettably for your authors—who dropped the fallacy about
using synthetic benchmarks to characterize performance in the fourth edition of
this book since we thought all computer architects agreed it was disreputable—
the synthetic program Dhrystone is still the most widely quoted benchmark for
embedded processors in 2017!
Another issue is the conditions under which the benchmarks are run. One way
to improve the performance of a benchmark has been with benchmark-specific
compiler flags; these flags often caused transformations that would be illegal on
many programs or would slow down performance on others. To restrict this pro-
cess and increase the significance of the results, benchmark developers typically
require the vendor to use one compiler and one set of flags for all the programs
in the same language (such as C++ or C). In addition to the question of compiler
flags, another question is whether source code modifications are allowed. There are
three different approaches to addressing this question:
1. No source code modifications are allowed.
2. Source code modifications are allowed but are essentially impossible. For
example, database benchmarks rely on standard database programs that are tens
of millions of lines of code. The database companies are highly unlikely to make
changes to enhance the performance for one particular computer.
3. Source modifications are allowed, as long as the altered version produces the
same output.1.8
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
■
41
The key issue that benchmark designers face in deciding to allow modification of the
source is whether such modifications will reflect real practice and provide useful
insight to users, or whether these changes simply reduce the accuracy of the bench-
marks as predictors of real performance. As we will see in Chapter 7, domain-
specific architects often follow the third option when creating processors for
well-defined tasks.
To overcome the danger of placing too many eggs in one basket, collections of
benchmark applications, called benchmark suites, are a popular measure of perfor-
mance of processors with a variety of applications. Of course, such collections are
only as good as the constituent individual benchmarks. Nonetheless, a key advan-
tage of such suites is that the weakness of any one benchmark is lessened by the
presence of the other benchmarks. The goal of a benchmark suite is that it will char-
acterize the real relative performance of two computers, particularly for programs
not in the suite that customers are likely to run.
A cautionary example is the Electronic Design News Embedded Microproces-
sor Benchmark Consortium (or EEMBC, pronounced “embassy”) benchmarks.
It is a set of 41 kernels used to predict performance of different embedded
applications: automotive/industrial, consumer, networking, office automation,
and telecommunications. EEMBC reports unmodified performance and “full fury”
performance, where almost anything goes. Because these benchmarks use small
kernels, and because of the reporting options, EEMBC does not have the reputation
of being a good predictor of relative performance of different embedded computers
in the field. This lack of success is why Dhrystone, which EEMBC was trying to
replace, is sadly still used.
One of the most successful attempts to create standardized benchmark appli-
cation suites has been the SPEC (Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation),
which had its roots in efforts in the late 1980s to deliver better benchmarks for
workstations. Just as the computer industry has evolved over time, so has the need
for different benchmark suites, and there are now SPEC benchmarks to cover many
application classes. All the SPEC benchmark suites and their reported results are
found at http://www.spec.org.
Although we focus our discussion on the SPEC benchmarks in many of the
following sections, many benchmarks have also been developed for PCs running
the Windows operating system.
Desktop Benchmarks
Desktop benchmarks divide into two broad classes: processor-intensive bench-
marks and graphics-intensive benchmarks, although many graphics benchmarks
include intensive processor activity. SPEC originally created a benchmark set
focusing on processor performance (initially called SPEC89), which has evolved
into its sixth generation: SPEC CPU2017, which follows SPEC2006, SPEC2000,
SPEC95 SPEC92, and SPEC89. SPEC CPU2017 consists of a set of 10 integer
benchmarks (CINT2017) and 17 floating-point benchmarks (CFP2017).
Figure 1.17 describes the current SPEC CPU benchmarks and their ancestry.SPEC2006
Benchmark name by SPEC generation
SPEC2000 SPEC95
SPEC92
SPEC89
gcc
perl
General data compression
mcf
omnetppbzip2
vortex
XZ
Discrete Event simulation - computer network
xalancbmkgzip
h264refArtificial Intelligence: alpha-beta tree search (Chess)X264
deepsjengArtificial Intelligence: Monte Carlo tree search (Go)leelagobmkeon
twolf
vortex
Artificial Intelligence: recursive solution generator (Sudoku)exchange2astarvpr
hmmer
libquantumparser
XML to HTML conversion via XSLT
Video compression
sjeng
compress
go
ijpeg
eqntott
sc
m88ksim
crafty
Explosion modelingbwavesPhysics: relativitycactuBSSNfpppp
tomcatv
Molecular dynamicsnamddoduc
Ray tracingpovraynasa7
Fluid dynamicslbmWeather forecastingwrf
Biomedical imaging: optical tomography with finite elements
3D rendering and animation
parest
gamess
blender
wupwise
cam4milcImage manipulationimagickzeusmpapply
Molecular dynamicsnabgromacsgalgel
Computational Electromagneticsfotonik3dRegional ocean modelingromsleslie3d
dealIImesa
art
soplexequake
calculix
GemsFDTDfacerec
ammp
Atmosphere modeling
tonto
sphinx3
apsiswim
hydro2d
mgridsu2cor
applu
turb3dwave5
spice
matrix300
lucas
fma3d
sixtrack
Figure 1.17 SPEC2017 programs and the evolution of the SPEC benchmarks over time, with integer programs above the line and floating-
point programs below the line. Of the 10 SPEC2017 integer programs, 5 are written in C, 4 in C++., and 1 in Fortran. For the floating-point
programs, the split is 3 in Fortran, 2 in C++, 2 in C, and 6 in mixed C, C++, and Fortran. The figure shows all 82 of the programs in the 1989,
1992, 1995, 2000, 2006, and 2017 releases. Gcc is the senior citizen of the group. Only 3 integer programs and 3 floating-point programs survived
three or more generations. Although a few are carried over from generation to generation, the version of the program changes and either the
input or the size of the benchmark is often expanded to increase its running time and to avoid perturbation in measurement or domination of the
execution time by some factor other than CPU time. The benchmark descriptions on the left are for SPEC2017 only and do not apply to earlier
versions. Programs in the same row from different generations of SPEC are generally not related; for example, fpppp is not a CFD code like
bwaves.
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Route planning
espresso
li
■
GNU C compiler
Perl interpreter
42
SPEC20171.8
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
■
43
SPEC benchmarks are real programs modified to be portable and to minimize
the effect of I/O on performance. The integer benchmarks vary from part of a C
compiler to a go program to a video compression. The floating-point benchmarks
include molecular dynamics, ray tracing, and weather forecasting. The SPEC
CPU suite is useful for processor benchmarking for both desktop systems and
single-processor servers. We will see data on many of these programs throughout
this book. However, these programs share little with modern programming lan-
guages and environments and the Google Translate application that Section 1.1
describes. Nearly half of them are written at least partially in Fortran! They are
even statically linked instead of being dynamically linked like most real pro-
grams. Alas, the SPEC2017 applications themselves may be real, but they are
not inspiring. It’s not clear that SPECINT2017 and SPECFP2017 capture what
is exciting about computing in the 21st century.
In Section 1.11, we describe pitfalls that have occurred in developing the SPEC
CPUbenchmark suite, as well as the challenges in maintaining a useful and pre-
dictive benchmark suite.
SPEC CPU2017 is aimed at processor performance, but SPEC offers many other
benchmarks. Figure 1.18 lists the 17 SPEC benchmarks that are active in 2017.
Server Benchmarks
Just as servers have multiple functions, so are there multiple types of benchmarks.
The simplest benchmark is perhaps a processor throughput-oriented benchmark.
SPEC CPU2017 uses the SPEC CPU benchmarks to construct a simple throughput
benchmark where the processing rate of a multiprocessor can be measured by run-
ning multiple copies (usually as many as there are processors) of each SPEC CPU
benchmark and converting the CPU time into a rate. This leads to a measurement
called the SPECrate, and it is a measure of request-level parallelism from Section
1.2. To measure thread-level parallelism, SPEC offers what they call high-
performance computing benchmarks around OpenMP and MPI as well as for
accelerators such as GPUs (see Figure 1.18).
Other than SPECrate, most server applications and benchmarks have signifi-
cant I/O activity arising from either storage or network traffic, including bench-
marks for file server systems, for web servers, and for database and transaction-
processing systems. SPEC offers both a file server benchmark (SPECSFS) and
a Java server benchmark. (Appendix D discusses some file and I/O system bench-
marks in detail.) SPECvirt_Sc2013 evaluates end-to-end performance of virtua-
lized data center servers. Another SPEC benchmark measures power, which we
examine in Section 1.10.
Transaction-processing (TP) benchmarks measure the ability of a system to
handle transactions that consist of database accesses and updates. Airline reserva-
tion systems and bank ATM systems are typical simple examples of TP; more
sophisticated TP systems involve complex databases and decision-making.44
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
CategoryNameMeasures performance of
CloudCloud_IaaS 2016Cloud using NoSQL database transaction and K-Means
clustering using map/reduce
CPUCPU2017Compute-intensive integer and floating-point workloads
SPECviewperf® 123D graphics in systems running OpenGL and Direct X
SPECwpc V2.0Workstations running professional apps under the
Windows OS
SPECapcSM for 3ds Max 2015™3D graphics running the proprietary Autodesk 3ds Max
2015 app
SPECapcSM for Maya® 20123D graphics running the proprietary Autodesk 3ds Max
2012 app
SPECapcSM for PTC Creo 3.03D graphics running the proprietary PTC Creo 3.0 app
SPECapcSM for Siemens NX 9.0
and 10.03D graphics running the proprietary Siemens NX 9.0 or
10.0 app
SPECapcSM for SolidWorks 20153D graphics of systems running the proprietary SolidWorks
2015 CAD/CAM app
ACCELAccelerator and host CPU running parallel applications
using OpenCL and OpenACC
MPI2007MPI-parallel, floating-point, compute-intensive programs
running on clusters and SMPs
OMP2012Parallel apps running OpenMP
Java client/serverSPECjbb2015Java servers
PowerSPECpower_ssj2008Power of volume server class computers running
SPECjbb2015
Solution File
Server (SFS)SFS2014File server throughput and response time
SPECsfs2008File servers utilizing the NFSv3 and CIFS protocols
VirtualizationSPECvirt_sc2013Datacenter servers used in virtualized server consolidation
Graphics and
workstation
performance
High performance
computing
Figure 1.18 Active benchmarks from SPEC as of 2017.
In the mid-1980s, a group of concerned engineers formed the vendor-independent
Transaction Processing Council (TPC) to try to create realistic and fair benchmarks
for TP. The TPC benchmarks are described at http://www.tpc.org.
The first TPC benchmark, TPC-A, was published in 1985 and has since been
replaced and enhanced by several different benchmarks. TPC-C, initially created in
1992, simulates a complex query environment. TPC-H models ad hoc decision
support—the queries are unrelated and knowledge of past queries cannot be used
to optimize future queries. The TPC-DI benchmark, a new data integration (DI)
task also known as ETL, is an important part of data warehousing. TPC-E is an
online transaction processing (OLTP) workload that simulates a brokerage firm’s
customer accounts.1.8
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
■
45
Recognizing the controversy between traditional relational databases and “No
SQL” storage solutions, TPCx-HS measures systems using the Hadoop file system
running MapReduce programs, and TPC-DS measures a decision support system
that uses either a relational database or a Hadoop-based system. TPC-VMS and
TPCx-V measure database performance for virtualized systems, and TPC-Energy
adds energy metrics to all the existing TPC benchmarks.
All the TPC benchmarks measure performance in transactions per second. In
addition, they include a response time requirement so that throughput performance
is measured only when the response time limit is met. To model real-world sys-
tems, higher transaction rates are also associated with larger systems, in terms
of both users and the database to which the transactions are applied. Finally, the
system cost for a benchmark system must be included as well to allow accurate
comparisons of cost-performance. TPC modified its pricing policy so that there
is a single specification for all the TPC benchmarks and to allow verification of
the prices that TPC publishes.
Reporting Performance Results
The guiding principle of reporting performance measurements should be repro-
ducibility—list everything another experimenter would need to duplicate the
results. A SPEC benchmark report requires an extensive description of the com-
puter and the compiler flags, as well as the publication of both the baseline and
the optimized results. In addition to hardware, software, and baseline tuning
parameter descriptions, a SPEC report contains the actual performance times,
shown both in tabular form and as a graph. A TPC benchmark report is even more
complete, because it must include results of a benchmarking audit and cost
information. These reports are excellent sources for finding the real costs of com-
puting systems, since manufacturers compete on high performance and cost-
performance.
Summarizing Performance Results
In practical computer design, one must evaluate myriad design choices for their
relative quantitative benefits across a suite of benchmarks believed to be relevant.
Likewise, consumers trying to choose a computer will rely on performance mea-
surements from benchmarks, which ideally are similar to the users’ applications. In
both cases, it is useful to have measurements for a suite of benchmarks so that the
performance of important applications is similar to that of one or more benchmarks
in the suite and so that variability in performance can be understood. In the best
case, the suite resembles a statistically valid sample of the application space,
but such a sample requires more benchmarks than are typically found in most suites
and requires a randomized sampling, which essentially no benchmark suite uses.46
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Once we have chosen to measure performance with a benchmark suite, we
want to be able to summarize the performance results of the suite in a unique num-
ber. A simple approach to computing a summary result would be to compare the
arithmetic means of the execution times of the programs in the suite. An alternative
would be to add a weighting factor to each benchmark and use the weighted arith-
metic mean as the single number to summarize performance. One approach is to
use weights that make all programs execute an equal time on some reference com-
puter, but this biases the results toward the performance characteristics of the ref-
erence computer.
Rather than pick weights, we could normalize execution times to a reference
computer by dividing the time on the reference computer by the time on the
computer being rated, yielding a ratio proportional to performance. SPEC uses this
approach, calling the ratio the SPECRatio. It has a particularly useful property
that matches the way we benchmark computer performance throughout this
text—namely, comparing performance ratios. For example, suppose that the
SPECRatio of computer A on a benchmark is 1.25 times as fast as computer B;
then we know
Execution timereference
SPECRatioA
Execution timeB PerformanceA
Execution timeA
1:25 ¼
¼
¼
¼
SPECRatioB Execution timereference Execution timeA PerformanceB
Execution timeB
Notice that the execution times on the reference computer drop out and the choice
of the reference computer is irrelevant when the comparisons are made as a ratio,
which is the approach we consistently use. Figure 1.19 gives an example.
Because a SPECRatio is a ratio rather than an absolute execution time,
the mean must be computed using the geometric mean. (Because SPECRatios
have no units, comparing SPECRatios arithmetically is meaningless.) The
formula is
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n
Y
n
Geometric mean ¼
samplei
i¼1
In the case of SPEC, samplei is the SPECRatio for program i. Using the geometric
mean ensures two important properties:
1. The geometric mean of the ratios is the same as the ratio of the geometric means.
2. The ratio of the geometric means is equal to the geometric mean of the perfor-
mance ratios, which implies that the choice of the reference computer is
irrelevant.
Therefore the motivations to use the geometric mean are substantial, especially
when we use performance ratios to make comparisons.1.8
Example
Answer
Measuring, Reporting, and Summarizing Performance
■
47
Show that the ratio of the geometric means is equal to the geometric mean of the
performance ratios and that the reference computer of SPECRatio does not matter.
Assume two computers A and B and a set of SPECRatios for each.
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n
Y
n
SPECRatio Ai
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n
Y
Geometric meanA
SPECRatio Ai
i ¼1
n
¼ sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ¼
n
Geometric meanB n Y
SPECRatio Bi
i ¼1
SPECRatio Bi
i ¼1
vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
u Execution time
referencei
u
sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
uY
n
n
n
Y
Y
Execution timeBi
PerformanceAi
Execution timeAi
u
n
¼ n
¼u
¼
n
t i ¼1 Execution timereferencei
Execution
time
PerformanceBi
A
i
i ¼1
i ¼1
Execution timeBi
That is, the ratio of the geometric means of the SPECRatios of A and B is the geo-
metric mean of the performance ratios of A to B of all the benchmarks in the suite.
Figure 1.19 demonstrates this validity using examples from SPEC.
BenchmarksSun Ultra
Enterprise
2 time
(seconds)AMD
A10-
6800K
time
(seconds)SPEC
2006Cint
ratioIntel Xeon
E5-2690
time
(seconds)SPEC
2006Cint
ratioAMD/Intel
times
(seconds)Intel/AMD
SPEC
ratios
perlbench977040124.3626137.431.541.54
bzip2965050519.1142222.871.201.20
gcc805049016.4322735.462.162.16
mcf912024936.6315359.611.631.63
gobmk10,49041825.1038227.461.091.09
hmmer933018251.2612077.751.521.52
sjeng12,10051723.4038331.591.351.35
libquantum20,72084246.0837295.7729.6529.65
h264ref22,13061136.2242552.071.441.44
omnetpp625031319.9715340.852.052.05
astar702030323.1720933.591.451.45
xalancbmk690021532.099870.412.192.19
63.722.002.00
Geometric mean
31.91
Figure 1.19 SPEC2006Cint execution times (in seconds) for the Sun Ultra 5—the reference computer of
SPEC2006—and execution times and SPECRatios for the AMD A10 and Intel Xeon E5-2690. The final two columns show
the ratios of execution times and SPEC ratios. This figure demonstrates the irrelevance of the reference computer in relative
performance. The ratio of the execution times is identical to the ratio of the SPEC ratios, and the ratio of the geometric
means (63.7231.91/20.86 ¼ 2.00) is identical to the geometric mean of the ratios (2.00). Section 1.11 discusses libquantum,
whose performance is orders of magnitude higher than the other SPEC benchmarks.48
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
1.9
Quantitative Principles of Computer Design
Now that we have seen how to define, measure, and summarize performance, cost,
dependability, energy, and power, we can explore guidelines and principles that are
useful in the design and analysis of computers. This section introduces important
observations about design, as well as two equations to evaluate alternatives.
Take Advantage of Parallelism
Using parallelism is one of the most important methods for improving perfor-
mance. Every chapter in this book has an example of how performance is enhanced
through the exploitation of parallelism. We give three brief examples here, which
are expounded on in later chapters.
Our first example is the use of parallelism at the system level. To improve the
throughput performance on a typical server benchmark, such as SPECSFS or TPC-
C, multiple processors and multiple storage devices can be used. The workload of
handling requests can then be spread among the processors and storage devices,
resulting in improved throughput. Being able to expand memory and the number
of processors and storage devices is called scalability, and it is a valuable asset for
servers. Spreading of data across many storage devices for parallel reads and writes
enables data-level parallelism. SPECSFS also relies on request-level parallelism to
use many processors, whereas TPC-C uses thread-level parallelism for faster pro-
cessing of database queries.
At the level of an individual processor, taking advantage of parallelism among
instructions is critical to achieving high performance. One of the simplest ways to
do this is through pipelining. (Pipelining is explained in more detail in Appendix C
and is a major focus of Chapter 3.) The basic idea behind pipelining is to overlap
instruction execution to reduce the total time to complete an instruction sequence.
A key insight into pipelining is that not every instruction depends on its immediate
predecessor, so executing the instructions completely or partially in parallel may be
possible. Pipelining is the best-known example of ILP.
Parallelism can also be exploited at the level of detailed digital design. For
example, set-associative caches use multiple banks of memory that are typically
searched in parallel to find a desired item. Arithmetic-logical units use carry-
lookahead, which uses parallelism to speed the process of computing sums from
linear to logarithmic in the number of bits per operand. These are more examples of
data-level parallelism.
Principle of Locality
Important fundamental observations have come from properties of programs. The
most important program property that we regularly exploit is the principle of local-
ity: programs tend to reuse data and instructions they have used recently. A widely
held rule of thumb is that a program spends 90% of its execution time in only 10%
of the code. An implication of locality is that we can predict with reasonable1.9
Quantitative Principles of Computer Design
■
49
accuracy what instructions and data a program will use in the near future based on
its accesses in the recent past. The principle of locality also applies to data accesses,
though not as strongly as to code accesses.
Two different types of locality have been observed. Temporal locality states
that recently accessed items are likely to be accessed soon. Spatial locality says
that items whose addresses are near one another tend to be referenced close
together in time. We will see these principles applied in Chapter 2.
Focus on the Common Case
Perhaps the most important and pervasive principle of computer design is to focus
on the common case: in making a design trade-off, favor the frequent case over the
infrequent case. This principle applies when determining how to spend resources,
because the impact of the improvement is higher if the occurrence is commonplace.
Focusing on the common case works for energy as well as for resource allo-
cation and performance. The instruction fetch and decode unit of a processor
may be used much more frequently than a multiplier, so optimize it first. It works
on dependability as well. If a database server has 50 storage devices for every pro-
cessor, storage dependability will dominate system dependability.
In addition, the common case is often simpler and can be done faster than the
infrequent case. For example, when adding two numbers in the processor, we can
expect overflow to be a rare circumstance and can therefore improve performance
by optimizing the more common case of no overflow. This emphasis may slow
down the case when overflow occurs, but if that is rare, then overall performance
will be improved by optimizing for the normal case.
We will see many cases of this principle throughout this text. In applying this
simple principle, we have to decide what the frequent case is and how much per-
formance can be improved by making that case faster. A fundamental law, called
Amdahl’s Law, can be used to quantify this principle.
Amdahl’s Law
The performance gain that can be obtained by improving some portion of a com-
puter can be calculated using Amdahl’s Law. Amdahl’s Law states that the perfor-
mance improvement to be gained from using some faster mode of execution is
limited by the fraction of the time the faster mode can be used.
Amdahl’s Law defines the speedup that can be gained by using a particular
feature. What is speedup? Suppose that we can make an enhancement to a com-
puter that will improve performance when it is used. Speedup is the ratio
Speedup ¼
Performance for entire task using the enhancement when possible
Performance for entire task without using the enhancement
Alternatively,
Speedup ¼
Execution time for entire task without using the enhancement
Execution time for entire task using the enhancement when possible50
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Speedup tells us how much faster a task will run using the computer with the enhance-
ment contrary to the original computer.
Amdahl’s Law gives us a quick way to find the speedup from some enhance-
ment, which depends on two factors:
1. The fraction of the computation time in the original computer that can be con-
verted to take advantage of the enhancement—For example, if 40 seconds of
the execution time of a program that takes 100 seconds in total can use an
enhancement, the fraction is 40/100. This value, which we call Fractionenhanced,
is always less than or equal to 1.
2. The improvement gained by the enhanced execution mode, that is, how much
faster the task would run if the enhanced mode were used for the entire pro-
gram—This value is the time of the original mode over the time of the enhanced
mode. If the enhanced mode takes, say, 4 seconds for a portion of the program,
while it is 40 seconds in the original mode, the improvement is 40/4 or 10. We
call this value, which is always greater than 1, Speedupenhanced.
The execution time using the original computer with the enhanced mode will be the
time spent using the unenhanced portion of the computer plus the time spent using
the enhancement:
#
#
Fractionenhanced
Execution timenew ¼ Execution timeold # ð1 # Fractionenhanced Þ +
Speedupenhanced
The overall speedup is the ratio of the execution times:
Speedupoverall ¼
Example
Answer
Execution timeold
¼
Execution timenew
1
ð1 # Fractionenhanced Þ +
Fractionenhanced
Speedupenhanced
Suppose that we want to enhance the processor used for web serving. The new
processor is 10 times faster on computation in the web serving application than
the old processor. Assuming that the original processor is busy with computation
40% of the time and is waiting for I/O 60% of the time, what is the overall speedup
gained by incorporating the enhancement?
Fractionenhanced ¼ 0:4; Speedupenhanced ¼ 10; Speedupoverall ¼
1
0:4
0:6 +
10
¼
1
# 1:56
0:64
Amdahl’s Law expresses the law of diminishing returns: The incremental improve-
ment in speedup gained by an improvement of just a portion of the computation
diminishes as improvements are added. An important corollary of Amdahl’s
Law is that if an enhancement is usable only for a fraction of a task, then we can’t
speed up the task by more than the reciprocal of 1 minus that fraction.1.9
Quantitative Principles of Computer Design
■
51
A common mistake in applying Amdahl’s Law is to confuse “fraction of time con-
verted to use an enhancement” and “fraction of time after enhancement is in use.”
If, instead of measuring the time that we could use the enhancement in a compu-
tation, we measure the time after the enhancement is in use, the results will be
incorrect!
Amdahl’s Law can serve as a guide to how much an enhancement will improve
performance and how to distribute resources to improve cost-performance. The
goal, clearly, is to spend resources proportional to where time is spent. Amdahl’s
Law is particularly useful for comparing the overall system performance of two
alternatives, but it can also be applied to compare two processor design alterna-
tives, as the following example shows.
Example
Answer
A common transformation required in graphics processors is square root. Imple-
mentations of floating-point (FP) square root vary significantly in performance,
especially among processors designed for graphics. Suppose FP square root
(FSQRT) is responsible for 20% of the execution time of a critical graphics bench-
mark. One proposal is to enhance the FSQRT hardware and speed up this operation
by a factor of 10. The other alternative is just to try to make all FP instructions in the
graphics processor run faster by a factor of 1.6; FP instructions are responsible for
half of the execution time for the application. The design team believes that they
can make all FP instructions run 1.6 times faster with the same effort as required for
the fast square root. Compare these two design alternatives.
We can compare these two alternatives by comparing the speedups:
1
¼
¼ 1:22
0:2 0:82
ð1 # 0:2Þ +
10
1
1
¼ 1:23
SpeedupFP ¼
¼
0:5 0:8125
ð1 # 0:5Þ +
1:6
SpeedupFSQRT ¼
1
Improving the performance of the FP operations overall is slightly better because
of the higher frequency.
Amdahl’s Law is applicable beyond performance. Let’s redo the reliability
example from page 39 after improving the reliability of the power supply via
redundancy from 200,000-hour to 830,000,000-hour MTTF, or 4150# better.
Example
The calculation of the failure rates of the disk subsystem was
Failure ratesystem ¼ 10 #
¼
1
1
1
1
1
+
+
+
+
1, 000,000 500,000 200,000 200,000 1,000, 000
10 + 2 + 5 + 5 + 1
23
¼
1,000, 000 hours 1, 000,000 hours52
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Therefore the fraction of the failure rate that could be improved is 5 per million
hours out of 23 for the whole system, or 0.22.
Answer
The reliability improvement would be
Improvementpower supply pair ¼
1
0:22
ð1 # 0:22Þ +
4150
¼
1
¼ 1:28
0:78
Despite an impressive 4150 # improvement in reliability of one module, from the
system’s perspective, the change has a measurable but small benefit.
In the preceding examples, we needed the fraction consumed by the new and
improved version; often it is difficult to measure these times directly. In the next
section, we will see another way of doing such comparisons based on the use
of an equation that decomposes the CPU execution time into three separate
components. If we know how an alternative affects these three components,
we can determine its overall performance. Furthermore, it is often possible to
build simulators that measure these components before the hardware is actually
designed.
The Processor Performance Equation
Essentially all computers are constructed using a clock running at a constant rate.
These discrete time events are called clock periods, clocks, cycles, or clock cycles.
Computer designers refer to the time of a clock period by its duration (e.g., 1 ns) or
by its rate (e.g., 1 GHz). CPU time for a program can then be expressed two ways:
CPU time ¼ CPU clock cycles for a program # Clock cycle time
or
CPU time ¼
CPU clock cycles for a program
Clock rate
In addition to the number of clock cycles needed to execute a program, we can
also count the number of instructions executed—the instruction path length or
instruction count (IC). If we know the number of clock cycles and the instruction
count, we can calculate the average number of clock cycles per instruction (CPI).
Because it is easier to work with, and because we will deal with simple processors
in this chapter, we use CPI. Designers sometimes also use instructions per clock
(IPC), which is the inverse of CPI.
CPI is computed as
CPI ¼
CPU clock cycles for a program
Instruction count
This processor figure of merit provides insight into different styles of instruction
sets and implementations, and we will use it extensively in the next four
chapters.1.9
Quantitative Principles of Computer Design
■
53
By transposing the instruction count in the preceding formula, clock cycles
can be defined as IC # CPI. This allows us to use CPI in the execution time
formula:
CPU time ¼ Instruction count # Cycles per instruction # Clock cycle time
Expanding the first formula into the units of measurement shows how the pieces fit
together:
Instructions Clock cycles
Seconds
Seconds
#
#
¼
¼ CPU time
Program
Instruction Clock cycle Program
As this formula demonstrates, processor performance is dependent upon three
characteristics: clock cycle (or rate), clock cycles per instruction, and instruction
count. Furthermore, CPU time is equally dependent on these three characteristics;
for example, a 10% improvement in any one of them leads to a 10% improvement
in CPU time.
Unfortunately, it is difficult to change one parameter in complete isolation from
others because the basic technologies involved in changing each characteristic are
interdependent:
■Clock cycle time—Hardware technology and organization
■CPI—Organization and instruction set architecture
■Instruction count—Instruction set architecture and compiler technology
Luckily, many potential performance improvement techniques primarily enhance
one component of processor performance with small or predictable impacts on the
other two.
In designing the processor, sometimes it is useful to calculate the number of
total processor clock cycles as
CPU clock cycles ¼
n
X
ICi # CPIi
i¼1
where ICi represents the number of times instruction i is executed in a program and
CPIi represents the average number of clocks per instruction for instruction i. This
form can be used to express CPU time as
CPU time ¼
n
X
!
ICi # CPIi # Clock cycle time
i¼1
and overall CPI as
n
X
CPI ¼
ICi # CPIi
i¼1
Instruction count
¼
n
X
ICi
# CPIi
Instruction
count
i¼1
The latter form of the CPI calculation uses each individual CPIi and the fraction of
occurrences of that instruction in a program (i.e., ICi # Instruction count). Because
it must include pipeline effects, cache misses, and any other memory system54
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
inefficiencies, CPIi should be measured and not just calculated from a table in the
back of a reference manual.
Consider our performance example on page 52, here modified to use measure-
ments of the frequency of the instructions and of the instruction CPI values, which,
in practice, are obtained by simulation or by hardware instrumentation.
Example
Suppose we made the following measurements:
Frequency of FP operations ¼ 25%
Average CPI of FP operations ¼ 4.0
Average CPI of other instructions ¼ 1.33
Frequency of FSQRT ¼ 2%
CPI of FSQRT ¼ 20
Assume that the two design alternatives are to decrease the CPI of FSQRT to 2 or to
decrease the average CPI of all FP operations to 2.5. Compare these two design
alternatives using the processor performance equation.
Answer
First, observe that only the CPI changes; the clock rate and instruction
count remain identical. We start by finding the original CPI with neither
enhancement:
CPIoriginal ¼
#
#
n
X
ICi
CPIi #
Instruction count
i¼1
¼ ð4 # 25%Þ + ð1:33 # 75%Þ ¼ 2:0
We can compute the CPI for the enhanced FSQRT by subtracting the cycles saved
from the original CPI:
#
#
CPIwith new FPSQR ¼ CPIoriginal # 2% # CPIold FPSQR # CPIof new FPSQR only
¼ 2:0 # 2% # ð20 # 2Þ ¼ 1:64
We can compute the CPI for the enhancement of all FP instructions the same way
or by summing the FP and non-FP CPIs. Using the latter gives us
CPInew FP ¼ ð75% # 1:33Þ + ð25% # 2:5Þ ¼ 1:625
Since the CPI of the overall FP enhancement is slightly lower, its performance will
be marginally better. Specifically, the speedup for the overall FP enhancement is
Speedupnew FP ¼
¼
CPU timeoriginal IC # Clock cycle # CPIoriginal
¼
CPU timenew FP IC # Clock cycle # CPInew FP
CPIoriginal 2:00
¼
¼ 1:23
CPInew FP 1:625
Happily, we obtained this same speedup using Amdahl’s Law on page 51.1.10
Putting It All Together: Performance, Price, and Power
■
55
It is often possible to measure the constituent parts of the processor performance
equation. Such isolated measurements are a key advantage of using the processor
performance equation versus Amdahl’s Law in the previous example. In particular,
it may be difficult to measure things such as the fraction of execution time for which
a set of instructions is responsible. In practice, this would probably be computed
by summing the product of the instruction count and the CPI for each of the instruc-
tions in the set. Since the starting point is often individual instruction count and
CPI measurements, the processor performance equation is incredibly useful.
To use the processor performance equation as a design tool, we need to be able to
measure the various factors. For an existing processor, it is easy to obtain the exe-
cution time by measurement, and we know the default clock speed. The challenge
lies in discovering the instruction count or the CPI. Most processors include counters
for both instructions executed and clock cycles. By periodically monitoring these
counters, it is also possible to attach execution time and instruction count to seg-
ments of the code, which can be helpful to programmers trying to understand and
tune the performance of an application. Often designers or programmers will want
to understand performance at a more fine-grained level than what is available from
the hardware counters. For example, they may want to know why the CPI is what it
is. In such cases, the simulation techniques used are like those for processors that are
being designed.
Techniques that help with energy efficiency, such as dynamic voltage fre-
quency scaling and overclocking (see Section 1.5), make this equation harder to
use, because the clock speed may vary while we measure the program. A simple
approach is to turn off those features to make the results reproducible. Fortunately,
as performance and energy efficiency are often highly correlated—taking less time
to run a program generally saves energy—it’s probably safe to consider perfor-
mance without worrying about the impact of DVFS or overclocking on the results.
1.10
Putting It All Together: Performance, Price, and Power
In the “Putting It All Together” sections that appear near the end of every chapter,
we provide real examples that use the principles in that chapter. In this section, we
look at measures of performance and power-performance in small servers using the
SPECpower benchmark.
Figure 1.20 shows the three multiprocessor servers we are evaluating along
with their price. To keep the price comparison fair, all are Dell PowerEdge servers.
The first is the PowerEdge R710, which is based on the Intel Xeon #85670 micro-
processor with a clock rate of 2.93 GHz. Unlike the Intel Core i7-6700 in Chapters
2–5, which has 20 cores and a 40 MB L3 cache, this Intel chip has 22 cores and a
55 MB L3 cache, although the cores themselves are identical. We selected a two-
socket system—so 44 cores total—with 128 GB of ECC-protected 2400 MHz
DDR4 DRAM. The next server is the PowerEdge C630, with the same processor,
number of sockets, and DRAM. The main difference is a smaller rack-mountable
package: “2U” high (3.5 inches) for the 730 versus “1U” (1.75 inches) for the 630.56
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
System 1
Component
System 2
Cost (% Cost)
$653 (7%)
System 3
Cost (% Cost)
PowerEdge R815
$1437 (15%)
Cost (% Cost)
Base serverPowerEdge R710Power supply570 WProcessorXeon X5670Clock rate2.93 GHz2.20 GHz2.20 GHz
Total cores122448
1100 W
$3738 (40%)
Opteron 6174
PowerEdge R815
$1437 (11%)
1100 W
$2679 (29%)
Opteron 6174
$5358 (42%)
Sockets224Cores/socket61212DRAM12 GBEthernet Inter.Dual 1-Gbit$199 (2%)Dual 1-Gbit$199 (2%)Dual 1-Gbit$199 (2%)
Disk50 GB SSD$1279 (14%)50 GB SSD$1279 (14%)50 GB SSD$1279 (10%)
$484 (5%)
16 GB
$2999 (32%)
Windows OS
32 GB
$2999 (33%)
$9352 (100%)
Total
$693 (7%)
$1386 (11%)
$2999 (24%)
$9286 (100%)
$12,658 (100%)
Max ssj_ops910,978926,6761,840,450
Max ssj_ops/$97100145
Figure 1.20 Three Dell PowerEdge servers being measured and their prices as of July 2016. We calculated the cost
of the processors by subtracting the cost of a second processor. Similarly, we calculated the overall cost of memory by
seeing what the cost of extra memory was. Hence the base cost of the server is adjusted by removing the estimated
cost of the default processor and memory. Chapter 5 describes how these multisocket systems are connected
together, and Chapter 6 describes how clusters are connected together.
The third server is a cluster of 16 of the PowerEdge 630 s that is connected
together with a 1 Gbit/s Ethernet switch. All are running the Oracle Java HotSpot
version 1.7 Java Virtual Machine (JVM) and the Microsoft Windows Server 2012
R2 Datacenter version 6.3 operating system.
Note that because of the forces of benchmarking (see Section 1.11), these are
unusually configured servers. The systems in Figure 1.20 have little memory rel-
ative to the amount of computation, and just a tiny 120 GB solid-state disk. It is
inexpensive to add cores if you don’t need to add commensurate increases in mem-
ory and storage!
Rather than run statically linked C programs of SPEC CPU, SPECpower uses a
more modern software stack written in Java. It is based on SPECjbb, and it repre-
sents the server side of business applications, with performance measured as the
number of transactions per second, called ssj_ops for server side Java operations
per second. It exercises not only the processor of the server, as does SPEC CPU,
but also the caches, memory system, and even the multiprocessor interconnection
system. In addition, it exercises the JVM, including the JIT runtime compiler and
garbage collector, as well as portions of the underlying operating system.
As the last two rows of Figure 1.20 show, the performance winner is the cluster
of 16 R630s, which is hardly a surprise since it is by far the most expensive. The
price-performance winner is the PowerEdge R630, but it barely beats the cluster at
213 versus 211 ssj-ops/$. Amazingly, the 16 node cluster is within 1% of the same
price-performances of a single node despite being 16 times as large.1.10
Putting It All Together: Performance, Price, and Power
■
57
While most benchmarks (and most computer architects) care only about per-
formance of systems at peak load, computers rarely run at peak load. Indeed,
Figure 6.2 in Chapter 6 shows the results of measuring the utilization of tens of
thousands of servers over 6 months at Google, and less than 1% operate at an aver-
age utilization of 100%. The majority have an average utilization of between 10%
and 50%. Thus the SPECpower benchmark captures power as the target workload
varies from its peak in 10% intervals all the way to 0%, which is called Active Idle.
Figure 1.21 plots the ssj_ops (SSJ operations/second) per watt and the average
power as the target load varies from 100% to 0%. The Intel R730 always has the
lowest power and the single node R630 has the best ssj_ops per watt across each
target workload level. Since watts ¼ joules/second, this metric is proportional to
SSJ operations per joule:
Dell 630 44 cores perf/wattDell 730 44 cores perf/wattDell 630 cluster 704 cores perf/watt
Dell 630 cluster 704 cores watts/nodeDell 630 44 cores wattsDell 730 44 cores watts
14000350
12000300
10000250
8000200
6000150
4000100
200050
Watts
ssj_ops/watt
ssj_operations=second ssj_operations=second ssj_operations
¼
¼
Watt
Joule=second
Joule
0
0
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
Active idle
Target Workload
Figure 1.21 Power-performance of the three servers in Figure 1.20. Ssj_ops/watt values are on the left axis, with
the three columns associated with it, and watts are on the right axis, with the three lines associated with it. The hor-
izontal axis shows the target workload, as it varies from 100% to Active Idle. The single node R630 has the best
ssj_ops/watt at each workload level, but R730 consumes the lowest power at each level.58
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
To calculate a single number to use to compare the power efficiency of sys-
tems, SPECpower uses
X
ssj_ops
Overall ssj_ops=watt ¼ X
power
The overall ssj_ops/watt of the three servers is 10,802 for the R730, 11,157 for the
R630, and 10,062 for the cluster of 16 R630s. Therefore the single node R630 has
the best power-performance. Dividing by the price of the servers, the ssj_ops/watt/
$1,000 is 879 for the R730, 899 for the R630, and 789 (per node) for the 16-node
cluster of R630s. Thus, after adding power, the single-node R630 is still in first
place in performance/price, but now the single-node R730 is significantly more
efficient than the 16-node cluster.
1.11
Fallacies and Pitfalls
The purpose of this section, which will be found in every chapter, is to explain
some commonly held misbeliefs or misconceptions that you should avoid. We call
such misbeliefs fallacies. When discussing a fallacy, we try to give a counterex-
ample. We also discuss pitfalls—easily made mistakes. Often pitfalls are general-
izations of principles that are true in a limited context. The purpose of these
sections is to help you avoid making these errors in computers that you design.
Pitfall
All exponential laws must come to an end.
The first to go was Dennard scaling. Dennard’s 1974 observation was that power
density was constant as transistors got smaller. If a transistor’s linear region shrank
by a factor 2, then both the current and voltage were also reduced by a factor of 2,
and so the power it used fell by 4. Thus chips could be designed to operate faster and
still use less power. Dennard scaling ended 30 years after it was observed, not
because transistors didn’t continue to get smaller but because integrated circuit
dependability limited how far current and voltage could drop. The threshold voltage
was driven so low that static power became a significant fraction of overall power.
The next deceleration was hard disk drives. Although there was no law for
disks, in the past 30 years the maximum areal density of hard drives—which deter-
mines disk capacity—improved by 30%–100% per year. In more recent years, it
has been less than 5% per year. Increasing density per drive has come primarily
from adding more platters to a hard disk drive.
Next up was the venerable Moore’s Law. It’s been a while since the number of
transistors per chip doubled every one to two years. For example, the DRAM chip
introduced in 2014 contained 8B transistors, and we won’t have a 16B transistor
DRAM chip in mass production until 2019, but Moore’s Law predicts a 64B tran-
sistor DRAM chip.
Moreover, the actual end of scaling of the planar logic transistor was even pre-
dicted to end by 2021. Figure 1.22 shows the predictions of the physical gate length1.11
Fallacies and Pitfalls
■
59
25
2013 report
2015 report
Physical gate length (nm)
20
15
10
5
0
2013
2015
2017
2019
2021
2023
Year
2024
2025
2027
2028
2030
Figure 1.22 Predictions of logic transistor dimensions from two editions of the ITRS report. These reports started
in 2001, but 2015 will be the last edition, as the group has disbanded because of waning interest. The only companies
that can produce state-of-the-art logic chips today are GlobalFoundaries, Intel, Samsung, and TSMC, whereas there
were 19 when the first ITRS report was released. With only four companies left, sharing of plans was too hard to
sustain. From IEEE Spectrum, July 2016, “Transistors will stop shrinking in 2021, Moore’s Law Roadmap Predicts,”
by Rachel Courtland.
of the logic transistor from two editions of the International Technology Roadmap
for Semiconductors (ITRS). Unlike the 2013 report that projected gate lengths
to reach 5 nm by 2028, the 2015 report projects the length stopping at 10 nm
by 2021. Density improvements thereafter would have to come from ways other
than shrinking the dimensions of transistors. It’s not as dire as the ITRS suggests,
as companies like Intel and TSMC have plans to shrink to 3 nm gate lengths, but
the rate of change is decreasing.
Figure 1.23 shows the changes in increases in bandwidth over time for micro-
processors and DRAM—which are affected by the end of Dennard scaling
and Moore’s Law—as well as for disks. The slowing of technology improvements
is apparent in the dropping curves. The continued networking improvement is
due to advances in fiber optics and a planned change in pulse amplitude modu-
lation (PAM-4) allowing two-bit encoding so as to transmit information at
400 Gbit/s.60
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
100,000
Microprocessor
Network
Relative Bandwidth Improvement
10,000
Memory
1000
Disk
100
10
1
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
Year
Figure 1.23 Relative bandwidth for microprocessors, networks, memory, and disks over time, based on data in
Figure 1.10.
Fallacy
Multiprocessors are a silver bullet.
The switch to multiple processors per chip around 2005 did not come from some
breakthrough that dramatically simplified parallel programming or made it easy to
build multicore computers. The change occurred because there was no other option
due to the ILP walls and power walls. Multiple processors per chip do not guar-
antee lower power; it’s certainly feasible to design a multicore chip that uses more
power. The potential is just that it’s possible to continue to improve performance
by replacing a high-clock-rate, inefficient core with several lower-clock-rate, effi-
cient cores. As technology to shrink transistors improves, it can shrink both capac-
itance and the supply voltage a bit so that we can get a modest increase in the1.11
Fallacies and Pitfalls
■
61
number of cores per generation. For example, for the past few years, Intel has been
adding two cores per generation in their higher-end chips.
As we will see in Chapters 4 and 5, performance is now a programmer’s bur-
den. The programmers’ La-Z-Boy era of relying on a hardware designer to make
their programs go faster without lifting a finger is officially over. If programmers
want their programs to go faster with each generation, they must make their pro-
grams more parallel.
The popular version of Moore’s law—increasing performance with each gen-
eration of technology—is now up to programmers.
Pitfall
Falling prey to Amdahl’s heartbreaking law.
Virtually every practicing computer architect knows Amdahl’s Law. Despite this,
we almost all occasionally expend tremendous effort optimizing some feature before
we measure its usage. Only when the overall speedup is disappointing do we recall
that we should have measured first before we spent so much effort enhancing it!
Pitfall
A single point of failure.
The calculations of reliability improvement using Amdahl’s Law on page 53 show
that dependability is no stronger than the weakest link in a chain. No matter how
much more dependable we make the power supplies, as we did in our example, the
single fan will limit the reliability of the disk subsystem. This Amdahl’s Law
observation led to a rule of thumb for fault-tolerant systems to make sure that every
component was redundant so that no single component failure could bring down
the whole system. Chapter 6 shows how a software layer avoids single points of
failure inside WSCs.
Fallacy
Hardware enhancements that increase performance also improve energy
efficiency, or are at worst energy neutral.
Esmaeilzadeh et al. (2011) measured SPEC2006 on just one core of a 2.67 GHz
Intel Core i7 using Turbo mode (Section 1.5). Performance increased by a factor
of 1.07 when the clock rate increased to 2.94 GHz (or a factor of 1.10), but the i7
used a factor of 1.37 more joules and a factor of 1.47 more watt hours!
Fallacy
Benchmarks remain valid indefinitely.
Several factors influence the usefulness of a benchmark as a predictor of real per-
formance, and some change over time. A big factor influencing the usefulness of a
benchmark is its ability to resist “benchmark engineering” or “benchmarketing.”
Once a benchmark becomes standardized and popular, there is tremendous pres-
sure to improve performance by targeted optimizations or by aggressive interpre-
tation of the rules for running the benchmark. Short kernels or programs that spend
their time in a small amount of code are particularly vulnerable.
For example, despite the best intentions, the initial SPEC89 benchmark suite
included a small kernel, called matrix300, which consisted of eight different
300 # 300 matrix multiplications. In this kernel, 99% of the execution time was
in a single line (see SPEC, 1989). When an IBM compiler optimized this inner loop62
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
(using a good idea called blocking, discussed in Chapters 2 and 4), performance
improved by a factor of 9 over a prior version of the compiler! This benchmark
tested compiler tuning and was not, of course, a good indication of overall perfor-
mance, nor of the typical value of this particular optimization.
Figure 1.19 shows that if we ignore history, we may be forced to repeat it.
SPEC Cint2006 had not been updated for a decade, giving compiler writers sub-
stantial time to hone their optimizers to this suite. Note that the SPEC ratios of all
benchmarks but libquantum fall within the range of 16–52 for the AMD computer
and from 22 to 78 for Intel. Libquantum runs about 250 times faster on AMD and
7300 times faster on Intel! This “miracle” is a result of optimizations by the Intel
compiler that automatically parallelizes the code across 22 cores and optimizes
memory by using bit packing, which packs together multiple narrow-range inte-
gers to save memory space and thus memory bandwidth. If we drop this benchmark
and recalculate the geometric means, AMD SPEC Cint2006 falls from 31.9 to 26.5
and Intel from 63.7 to 41.4. The Intel computer is now about 1.5 times as fast as the
AMD computer instead of 2.0 if we include libquantum, which is surely closer to
their real relative performances. SPECCPU2017 dropped libquantum.
To illustrate the short lives of benchmarks, Figure 1.17 on page 43 lists the
status of all 82 benchmarks from the various SPEC releases; Gcc is the lone sur-
vivor from SPEC89. Amazingly, about 70% of all programs from SPEC2000 or
earlier were dropped from the next release.
Fallacy
The rated mean time to failure of disks is 1,200,000 hours or almost 140 years,
so disks practically never fail.
The current marketing practices of disk manufacturers can mislead users. How is
such an MTTF calculated? Early in the process, manufacturers will put thousands
of disks in a room, run them for a few months, and count the number that fail. They
compute MTTF as the total number of hours that the disks worked cumulatively
divided by the number that failed.
One problem is that this number far exceeds the lifetime of a disk, which is
commonly assumed to be five years or 43,800 hours. For this large MTTF to make
some sense, disk manufacturers argue that the model corresponds to a user who
buys a disk and then keeps replacing the disk every 5 years—the planned lifetime
of the disk. The claim is that if many customers (and their great-grandchildren) did
this for the next century, on average they would replace a disk 27 times before a
failure, or about 140 years.
A more useful measure is the percentage of disks that fail, which is called
the annual failure rate. Assume 1000 disks with a 1,000,000-hour MTTF and
that the disks are used 24 hours a day. If you replaced failed disks with a new
one having the same reliability characteristics, the number that would fail in a year
(8760 hours) is
Failed disks ¼
Number of disks # Time period 1000 disks # 8760 hours=drive
¼
¼9
MTTF
1,000, 000 hours=failure
Stated alternatively, 0.9% would fail per year, or 4.4% over a 5-year lifetime.1.11
Fallacies and Pitfalls
■
63
Moreover, those high numbers are quoted assuming limited ranges of temper-
ature and vibration; if they are exceeded, then all bets are off. A survey of disk
drives in real environments (Gray and van Ingen, 2005) found that 3%–7% of
drives failed per year, for an MTTF of about 125,000–300,000 hours. An even
larger study found annual disk failure rates of 2%–10% (Pinheiro et al., 2007).
Therefore the real-world MTTF is about 2–10 times worse than the
manufacturer’s MTTF.
Fallacy
Peak performance tracks observed performance.
The only universally true definition of peak performance is “the performance level
a computer is guaranteed not to exceed.” Figure 1.24 shows the percentage of peak
performance for four programs on four multiprocessors. It varies from 5% to 58%.
Since the gap is so large and can vary significantly by benchmark, peak perfor-
mance is not generally useful in predicting observed performance.
70%
Power4
Percentage of peak performance
Itanium 2
58%
60%
54%
NEC earth simulator
54%
Cray X1
50%
40%
34%
33%
34%
30%
20%
20%
16%
10%
10%
6%
11%
11%
7%
6%
6% 5%
0%
Paratec
plasma physics
LBMHD
materials science
Cactus
astrophysics
GTC
magnetic fusion
Figure 1.24 Percentage of peak performance for four programs on four multiprocessors scaled to 64 processors.
The Earth Simulator and X1 are vector processors (see Chapter 4 and Appendix G). Not only did they deliver a higher
fraction of peak performance, but they also had the highest peak performance and the lowest clock rates. Except for
the Paratec program, the Power 4 and Itanium 2 systems delivered between 5% and 10% of their peak. From Oliker,
L., Canning, A., Carter, J., Shalf, J., Ethier, S., 2004. Scientific computations on modern parallel vector systems. In: Proc.
ACM/IEEE Conf. on Supercomputing, November 6–12, 2004, Pittsburgh, Penn., p. 10.64
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Pitfall
Fault detection can lower availability.
This apparently ironic pitfall is because computer hardware has a fair amount of
state that may not always be critical to proper operation. For example, it is not fatal
if an error occurs in a branch predictor, because only performance may suffer.
In processors that try to exploit ILP aggressively, not all the operations are
needed for correct execution of the program. Mukherjee et al. (2003) found that
less than 30% of the operations were potentially on the critical path for the
SPEC2000 benchmarks.
The same observation is true about programs. If a register is “dead” in a pro-
gram—that is, the program will write the register before it is read again—then
errors do not matter. If you were to crash the program upon detection of a transient
fault in a dead register, it would lower availability unnecessarily.
The Sun Microsystems Division of Oracle lived this pitfall in 2000 with an L2
cache that included parity, but not error correction, in its Sun E3000 to Sun E10000
systems. The SRAMs they used to build the caches had intermittent faults, which
parity detected. If the data in the cache were not modified, the processor would
simply reread the data from the cache. Because the designers did not protect the
cache with ECC (error-correcting code), the operating system had no choice but
to report an error to dirty data and crash the program. Field engineers found no
problems on inspection in more than 90% of the cases.
To reduce the frequency of such errors, Sun modified the Solaris operating sys-
tem to “scrub” the cache by having a process that proactively wrote dirty data to
memory. Because the processor chips did not have enough pins to add ECC, the
only hardware option for dirty data was to duplicate the external cache, using the
copy without the parity error to correct the error.
The pitfall is in detecting faults without providing a mechanism to correct
them. These engineers are unlikely to design another computer without ECC on
external caches.
1.12
Concluding Remarks
This chapter has introduced a number of concepts and provided a quantitative
framework that we will expand on throughout the book. Starting with the last edi-
tion, energy efficiency is the constant companion to performance.
In Chapter 2, we start with the all-important area of memory system design. We
will examine a wide range of techniques that conspire to make memory look infi-
nitely large while still being as fast as possible. (Appendix B provides introductory
material on caches for readers without much experience and background with
them.) As in later chapters, we will see that hardware-software cooperation has
become a key to high-performance memory systems, just as it has to high-
performance pipelines. This chapter also covers virtual machines, an increasingly
important technique for protection.
In Chapter 3, we look at ILP, of which pipelining is the simplest and most com-
mon form. Exploiting ILP is one of the most important techniques for building1.12
Concluding Remarks
■
65
high-speed uniprocessors. Chapter 3 begins with an extensive discussion of basic
concepts that will prepare you for the wide range of ideas examined in both chap-
ters. Chapter 3 uses examples that span about 40 years, drawing from one of the
first supercomputers (IBM 360/91) to the fastest processors on the market in 2017.
It emphasizes what is called the dynamic or runtime approach to exploiting ILP. It
also talks about the limits to ILP ideas and introduces multithreading, which is fur-
ther developed in both Chapters 4 and 5. Appendix C provides introductory mate-
rial on pipelining for readers without much experience and background in
pipelining. (We expect it to be a review for many readers, including those of
our introductory text, Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/Soft-
ware Interface.)
Chapter 4 explains three ways to exploit data-level parallelism. The classic and
oldest approach is vector architecture, and we start there to lay down the principles
of SIMD design. (Appendix G goes into greater depth on vector architectures.) We
next explain the SIMD instruction set extensions found in most desktop micropro-
cessors today. The third piece is an in-depth explanation of how modern graphics
processing units (GPUs) work. Most GPU descriptions are written from the pro-
grammer’s perspective, which usually hides how the computer really works. This
section explains GPUs from an insider’s perspective, including a mapping between
GPU jargon and more traditional architecture terms.
Chapter 5 focuses on the issue of achieving higher performance using multiple
processors, or multiprocessors. Instead of using parallelism to overlap individual
instructions, multiprocessing uses parallelism to allow multiple instruction streams
to be executed simultaneously on different processors. Our focus is on the domi-
nant form of multiprocessors, shared-memory multiprocessors, though we intro-
duce other types as well and discuss the broad issues that arise in any
multiprocessor. Here again we explore a variety of techniques, focusing on the
important ideas first introduced in the 1980s and 1990s.
Chapter 6 introduces clusters and then goes into depth on WSCs, which com-
puter architects help design. The designers of WSCs are the professional descen-
dants of the pioneers of supercomputers, such as Seymour Cray, in that they are
designing extreme computers. WSCs contain tens of thousands of servers, and
the equipment and the building that holds them cost nearly $200 million. The con-
cerns of price-performance and energy efficiency of the earlier chapters apply to
WSCs, as does the quantitative approach to making decisions.
Chapter 7 is new to this edition. It introduces domain-specific architectures as
the only path forward for improved performance and energy efficiency given the
end of Moore’s Law and Dennard scaling. It offers guidelines on how to build effec-
tive domain-specific architectures, introduces the exciting domain of deep neural
networks, describes four recent examples that take very different approaches to
accelerating neural networks, and then compares their cost-performance.
This book comes with an abundance of material online (see Preface for more
details), both to reduce cost and to introduce readers to a variety of advanced
topics. Figure 1.25 shows them all. Appendices A–C, which appear in the book,
will be a review for many readers.66
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
AppendixTitle
AInstruction Set Principles
BReview of Memory Hierarchies
CPipelining: Basic and Intermediate Concepts
DStorage Systems
EEmbedded Systems
FInterconnection Networks
GVector Processors in More Depth
HHardware and Software for VLIW and EPIC
ILarge-Scale Multiprocessors and Scientific Applications
JComputer Arithmetic
KSurvey of Instruction Set Architectures
LAdvanced Concepts on Address Translation
MHistorical Perspectives and References
Figure 1.25 List of appendices.
In Appendix D, we move away from a processor-centric view and discuss
issues in storage systems. We apply a similar quantitative approach, but one based
on observations of system behavior and using an end-to-end approach to perfor-
mance analysis. This appendix addresses the important issue of how to store
and retrieve data efficiently using primarily lower-cost magnetic storage technol-
ogies. Our focus is on examining the performance of disk storage systems for typ-
ical I/O-intensive workloads, such as the OLTP benchmarks mentioned in this
chapter. We extensively explore advanced topics in RAID-based systems, which
use redundant disks to achieve both high performance and high availability.
Finally, Appendix D introduces queuing theory, which gives a basis for trading
off utilization and latency.
Appendix E applies an embedded computing perspective to the ideas of each of
the chapters and early appendices.
Appendix F explores the topic of system interconnect broadly, including wide
area and system area networks that allow computers to communicate.
Appendix H reviews VLIW hardware and software, which, in contrast, are less
popular than when EPIC appeared on the scene just before the last edition.
Appendix I describes large-scale multiprocessors for use in high-performance
computing.
Appendix J is the only appendix that remains from the first edition, and it
covers computer arithmetic.
Appendix K provides a survey of instruction architectures, including the
80x86, the IBM 360, the VAX, and many RISC architectures, including ARM,
MIPS, Power, RISC-V, and SPARC.
Appendix L is new and discusses advanced techniques for memory manage-
ment, focusing on support for virtual machines and design of address translationCase Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
■
67
for very large address spaces. With the growth in cloud processors, these architec-
tural enhancements are becoming more important.
We describe Appendix M next.
1.13
Historical Perspectives and References
Appendix M (available online) includes historical perspectives on the key ideas
presented in each of the chapters in this text. These historical perspective sections
allow us to trace the development of an idea through a series of machines or to
describe significant projects. If you’re interested in examining the initial develop-
ment of an idea or processor or want further reading, references are provided at the
end of each history. For this chapter, see Section M.2, “The Early Development of
Computers,” for a discussion on the early development of digital computers and
performance measurement methodologies.
As you read the historical material, you’ll soon come to realize that one of the
important benefits of the youth of computing, compared to many other engineering
fields, is that some of the pioneers are still alive—we can learn the history by
simply asking them!
Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
Case Study 1: Chip Fabrication Cost
Concepts illustrated by this case study
■Fabrication Cost
■Fabrication Yield
■Defect Tolerance Through Redundancy
Many factors are involved in the price of a computer chip. Intel is spending $7 billion
to complete its Fab 42 fabrication facility for 7 nm technology. In this case study, we
explore a hypothetical company in the same situation and how different design deci-
sions involving fabrication technology, area, and redundancy affect the cost of chips.
1.1
[10/10] <1.6> Figure 1.26 gives hypothetical relevant chip statistics that influence
the cost of several current chips. In the next few exercises, you will be exploring the
effect of different possible design decisions for the Intel chips.
Die Size
(mm2)Estimated defect rate
(per cm2)NManufacturing
size (nm)Transistors
(billion)Cores
BlueDragon1800.0312107.54
RedDragon1200.041477.54
2000.04147128
Chip
Phoenix
8
Figure 1.26 Manufacturing cost factors for several hypothetical current and future processors.68
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
a. [10] <1.6> What is the yield for the Phoenix chip?
b. [10] <1.6> Why does Phoenix have a higher defect rate than BlueDragon?
1.2
[20/20/20/20] <1.6> They will sell a range of chips from that factory, and they
need to decide how much capacity to dedicate to each chip. Imagine that they will
sell two chips. Phoenix is a completely new architecture designed with 7 nm tech-
nology in mind, whereas RedDragon is the same architecture as their 10 nm Blue-
Dragon. Imagine that RedDragon will make a profit of $15 per defect-free
chip. Phoenix will make a profit of $30 per defect-free chip. Each wafer has
a 450 mm diameter.
a. [20] <1.6> How much profit do you make on each wafer of Phoenix chips?
b. [20] <1.6> How much profit do you make on each wafer of RedDragon
chips?
c. [20] <1.6> If your demand is 50,000 RedDragon chips per month and 25,000
Phoenix chips per month, and your facility can fabricate 70 wafers a month, how
many wafers should you make of each chip?
1.3
[20/20] <1.6> Your colleague at AMD suggests that, since the yield is so poor,
you might make chips more cheaply if you released multiple versions of the same
chip, just with different numbers of cores. For example, you could sell Phoenix8,
Phoenix4, Phoenix2, and Phoenix1, which contain 8, 4, 2, and 1 cores on each chip,
respectively. If all eight cores are defect-free, then it is sold as Phoenix8. Chips with
four to seven defect-free cores are sold as Phoenix4, and those with two or three
defect-free cores are sold as Phoenix2. For simplification, calculate the yield for
a single core as the yield for a chip that is 1/8 the area of the original Phoenix chip.
Then view that yield as an independent probability of a single core being defect
free. Calculate the yield for each configuration as the probability of at the corre-
sponding number of cores being defect free.
a. [20] <1.6> What is the yield for a single core being defect free as well as the
yield for Phoenix4, Phoenix2 and Phoenix1?
b. [5] <1.6> Using your results from part a, determine which chips you think it
would be worthwhile to package and sell, and why.
c. [10] <1.6> If it previously cost $20 dollars per chip to produce Phoenix8, what
will be the cost of the new Phoenix chips, assuming that there are no additional
costs associated with rescuing them from the trash?
d. [20] <1.6> You currently make a profit of $30 for each defect-free Phoenix8, and
you will sell each Phoenix4 chip for $25. How much is your profit per Phoenix8
chip if you consider (i) the purchase price of Phoenix4 chips to be entirely profit
and (ii) apply the profit of Phoenix4 chips to each Phoenix8 chip in proportion
to how many are produced? Use the yields calculated from part Problem 1.3a,
not from problem 1.1a.Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
■
69
Case Study 2: Power Consumption in Computer Systems
Concepts illustrated by this case study
■Amdahl’s Law
■Redundancy
■MTTF
■Power Consumption
Power consumption in modern systems is dependent on a variety of factors, includ-
ing the chip clock frequency, efficiency, and voltage. The following exercises
explore the impact on power and energy that different design decisions and use
scenarios have.
1.4
[10/10/10/10] <1.5> A cell phone performs very different tasks, including stream-
ing music, streaming video, and reading email. These tasks perform very different
computing tasks. Battery life and overheating are two common problems for cell
phones, so reducing power and energy consumption are critical. In this problem,
we consider what to do when the user is not using the phone to its full computing
capacity. For these problems, we will evaluate an unrealistic scenario in which the
cell phone has no specialized processing units. Instead, it has a quad-core, general-
purpose processing unit. Each core uses 0.5 W at full use. For email-related tasks,
the quad-core is 8# as fast as necessary.
a. [10] <1.5> How much dynamic energy and power are required compared to
running at full power? First, suppose that the quad-core operates for 1/8 of
the time and is idle for the rest of the time. That is, the clock is disabled for
7/8 of the time, with no leakage occurring during that time. Compare total
dynamic energy as well as dynamic power while the core is running.
b. [10] <1.5> How much dynamic energy and power are required using fre-
quency and voltage scaling? Assume frequency and voltage are both reduced
to 1/8 the entire time.
c. [10] <1.6, 1.9> Now assume the voltage may not decrease below 50% of the
original voltage. This voltage is referred to as the voltage floor, and any voltage
lower than that will lose the state. Therefore, while the frequency can keep
decreasing, the voltage cannot. What are the dynamic energy and power savings
in this case?
d. [10] <1.5> How much energy is used with a dark silicon approach? This
involves creating specialized ASIC hardware for each major task and power70
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
gating those elements when not in use. Only one general-purpose core would be
provided, and the rest of the chip would be filled with specialized units.
For email, the one core would operate for 25% the time and be turned
completely off with power gating for the other 75% of the time. During the other
75% of the time, a specialized ASIC unit that requires 20% of the energy of a
core would be running.
1.5
[10/10/10] <1.5> As mentioned in Exercise 1.4, cell phones run a wide variety of
applications. We’ll make the same assumptions for this exercise as the previous
one, that it is 0.5 W per core and that a quad core runs email 3# as fast.
a. [10] <1.5> Imagine that 80% of the code is parallelizable. By how much would
the frequency and voltage on a single core need to be increased in order to exe-
cute at the same speed as the four-way parallelized code?
b. [10] <1.5> What is the reduction in dynamic energy from using frequency and
voltage scaling in part a?
c. [10] <1.5> How much energy is used with a dark silicon approach? In this
approach, all hardware units are power gated, allowing them to turn off entirely
(causing no leakage). Specialized ASICs are provided that perform the same
computation for 20% of the power as the general-purpose processor. Imagine
that each core is power gated. The video game requires two ASICS and two
cores. How much dynamic energy does it require compared to the baseline
of parallelized on four cores?
1.6
1
[10/10/10/10/10/20] <1.5,1.9> General-purpose processes are optimized for
general-purpose computing. That is, they are optimized for behavior that is gener-
ally found across a large number of applications. However, once the domain is
restricted somewhat, the behavior that is found across a large number of the target
applications may be different from general-purpose applications. One such appli-
cation is deep learning or neural networks. Deep learning can be applied to many
different applications, but the fundamental building block of inference—using the
learned information to make decisions—is the same across them all. Inference
operations are largely parallel, so they are currently performed on graphics proces-
sing units, which are specialized more toward this type of computation, and not to
inference in particular. In a quest for more performance per watt, Google has cre-
ated a custom chip using tensor processing units to accelerate inference operations
in deep learning.1 This approach can be used for speech recognition and image
recognition, for example. This problem explores the trade-offs between this pro-
cess, a general-purpose processor (Haswell E5-2699 v3) and a GPU (NVIDIA
K80), in terms of performance and cooling. If heat is not removed from the com-
puter efficiently, the fans will blow hot air back onto the computer, not cold air.
Note: The differences are more than processor—on-chip memory and DRAM also
come into play. Therefore statistics are at a system level, not a chip level.
Cite paper at this website: https://drive.google.com/file/d/0Bx4hafXDDq2EMzRNcy1vSUxtcEk/view.Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
■
71
a. [10] <1.9> If Google’s data center spends 70% of its time on workload A and
30% of its time on workload B when running GPUs, what is the speedup of the
TPU system over the GPU system?
b. [10] <1.9> If Google’s data center spends 70% of its time on workload A and
30% of its time on workload B when running GPUs, what percentage of Max
IPS does it achieve for each of the three systems?
c. [15] <1.5, 1.9> Building on (b), assuming that the power scales linearly from
idle to busy power as IPS grows from 0% to 100%, what is the performance per
watt of the TPU system over the GPU system?
d. [10] <1.9> If another data center spends 40% of its time on workload A, 10%
of its time on workload B, and 50% of its time on workload C, what are the
speedups of the GPU and TPU systems over the general-purpose system?
e. [10] <1.5> A cooling door for a rack costs $4000 and dissipates 14 kW (into
the room; additional cost is required to get it out of the room). How many
Haswell-, NVIDIA-, or Tensor-based servers can you cool with one cooling
door, assuming TDP in Figures 1.27 and 1.28?
f. [20] <1.5> Typical server farms can dissipate a maximum of 200 W per square
foot. Given that a server rack requires 11 square feet (including front and back
clearance), how many servers from part (e) can be placed on a single rack, and
how many cooling doors are required?
SystemChipTDPIdle powerBusy power
General-purposeHaswell E5-2699 v3504 W159 W455 W
Graphics processorNVIDIA K801838 W357 W991 W
Custom ASICTPU861 W290 W384 W
Figure 1.27 Hardware characteristics for general-purpose processor, graphical processing unit-based or custom
ASIC-based system, including measured power (cite ISCA paper).
System
Chip
Throughput
% Max IPS
ABCABC
General-purposeHaswell E5-2699 v3548213,19412,00042%100%90%
Graphics processorNVIDIA K8013,46136,46515,00037%100%40%
Custom ASICTPU225,000280,000200080%100%1%
Figure 1.28 Performance characteristics for general-purpose processor, graphical processing unit-based or
custom ASIC-based system on two neural-net workloads (cite ISCA paper). Workloads A and B are from published
results. Workload C is a fictional, more general-purpose application.72
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
Exercises
1.7
[10/15/15/10/10] <1.4, 1.5> One challenge for architects is that the design created
today will require several years of implementation, verification, and testing before
appearing on the market. This means that the architect must project what the tech-
nology will be like several years in advance. Sometimes, this is difficult to do.
a. [10] <1.4> According to the trend in device scaling historically observed by
Moore’s Law, the number of transistors on a chip in 2025 should be how many
times the number in 2015?
b. [15] <1.5> The increase in performance once mirrored this trend. Had perfor-
mance continued to climb at the same rate as in the 1990s, approximately what
performance would chips have over the VAX-11/780 in 2025?
c. [15] <1.5> At the current rate of increase of the mid-2000s, what is a more
updated projection of performance in 2025?
d. [10] <1.4> What has limited the rate of growth of the clock rate, and what are
architects doing with the extra transistors now to increase performance?
e. [10] <1.4> The rate of growth for DRAM capacity has also slowed down. For
20 years, DRAM capacity improved by 60% each year. If 8 Gbit DRAM was
first available in 2015, and 16 Gbit is not available until 2019, what is the cur-
rent DRAM growth rate?
1.8
[10/10] <1.5> You are designing a system for a real-time application in which
specific deadlines must be met. Finishing the computation faster gains nothing.
You find that your system can execute the necessary code, in the worst case, twice
as fast as necessary.
a. [10] <1.5> How much energy do you save if you execute at the current speed
and turn off the system when the computation is complete?
b. [10] <1.5> How much energy do you save if you set the voltage and frequency
to be half as much?
1.9
[10/10/20/20] <1.5> Server farms such as Google and Yahoo! provide enough
compute capacity for the highest request rate of the day. Imagine that most of
the time these servers operate at only 60% capacity. Assume further that the power
does not scale linearly with the load; that is, when the servers are operating at 60%
capacity, they consume 90% of maximum power. The servers could be turned off,
but they would take too long to restart in response to more load. A new system has
been proposed that allows for a quick restart but requires 20% of the maximum
power while in this “barely alive” state.
a. [10] <1.5> How much power savings would be achieved by turning off 60% of
the servers?
b. [10] <1.5> How much power savings would be achieved by placing 60% of
the servers in the “barely alive” state?Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
■
73
c. [20] <1.5> How much power savings would be achieved by reducing the volt-
age by 20% and frequency by 40%?
d. [20] <1.5> How much power savings would be achieved by placing 30% of
the servers in the “barely alive” state and 30% off?
1.10
[10/10/20] <1.7> Availability is the most important consideration for designing
servers, followed closely by scalability and throughput.
a. [10] <1.7> We have a single processor with a failure in time (FIT) of 100. What
is the mean time to failure (MTTF) for this system?
b. [10] <1.7> If it takes one day to get the system running again, what is the avail-
ability of the system?
c. [20] <1.7> Imagine that the government, to cut costs, is going to build a super-
computer out of inexpensive computers rather than expensive, reliable com-
puters. What is the MTTF for a system with 1000 processors? Assume that
if one fails, they all fail.
1.11
[20/20/20] <1.1, 1.2, 1.7> In a server farm such as that used by Amazon or eBay, a
single failure does not cause the entire system to crash. Instead, it will reduce the
number of requests that can be satisfied at any one time.
a. [20] <1.7> If a company has 10,000 computers, each with an MTTF of 35 days,
and it experiences catastrophic failure only if 1/3 of the computers fail, what is
the MTTF for the system?
b. [20] <1.1, 1.7> If it costs an extra $1000, per computer, to double the MTTF,
would this be a good business decision? Show your work.
c. [20] <1.2> Figure 1.3 shows, on average, the cost of downtimes, assuming that
the cost is equal at all times of the year. For retailers, however, the Christmas
season is the most profitable (and therefore the most costly time to lose sales). If
a catalog sales center has twice as much traffic in the fourth quarter as every
other quarter, what is the average cost of downtime per hour during the fourth
quarter and the rest of the year?
1.12
[20/10/10/10/15] <1.9> In this exercise, assume that we are considering enhanc-
ing a quad-core machine by adding encryption hardware to it. When computing
encryption operations, it is 20 times faster than the normal mode of execution.
We will define percentage of encryption as the percentage of time in the original
execution that is spent performing encryption operations. The specialized hard-
ware increases power consumption by 2%.
a. [20] <1.9> Draw a graph that plots the speedup as a percentage of the compu-
tation spent performing encryption. Label the y-axis “Net speedup” and label
the x-axis “Percent encryption.”
b. [10] <1.9> With what percentage of encryption will adding encryption hard-
ware result in a speedup of 2?
c. [10] <1.9> What percentage of time in the new execution will be spent on
encryption operations if a speedup of 2 is achieved?74
■
Chapter One Fundamentals of Quantitative Design and Analysis
d. [15] <1.9> Suppose you have measured the percentage of encryption to be
50%. The hardware design group estimates it can speed up the encryption hard-
ware even more with significant additional investment. You wonder whether
adding a second unit in order to support parallel encryption operations would
be more useful. Imagine that in the original program, 90% of the encryption
operations could be performed in parallel. What is the speedup of providing
two or four encryption units, assuming that the parallelization allowed is limited
to the number of encryption units?
1.13
[15/10] <1.9> Assume that we make an enhancement to a computer that improves
some mode of execution by a factor of 10. Enhanced mode is used 50% of the time,
measured as a percentage of the execution time when the enhanced mode is in use.
Recall that Amdahl’s Law depends on the fraction of the original, unenhanced exe-
cution time that could make use of enhanced mode. Thus we cannot directly use
this 50% measurement to compute speedup with Amdahl’s Law.
a. [15] <1.9> What is the speedup we have obtained from fast mode?
b. [10] <1.9> What percentage of the original execution time has been converted
to fast mode?
1.14
[20/20/15] <1.9> When making changes to optimize part of a processor, it is often
the case that speeding up one type of instruction comes at the cost of slowing down
something else. For example, if we put in a complicated fast floating-point unit,
that takes space, and something might have to be moved farther away from the
middle to accommodate it, adding an extra cycle in delay to reach that unit. The
basic Amdahl’s Law equation does not take into account this trade-off.
a. [20] <1.9> If the new fast floating-point unit speeds up floating-point opera-
tions by, on average, 2x, and floating-point operations take 20% of the original
program’s execution time, what is the overall speedup (ignoring the penalty to
any other instructions)?
b. [20] <1.9> Now assume that speeding up the floating-point unit slowed down
data cache accesses, resulting in a 1.5x slowdown (or 2/3 speedup). Data cache
accesses consume 10% of the execution time. What is the overall speedup now?
c. [15] <1.9> After implementing the new floating-point operations, what per-
centage of execution time is spent on floating-point operations? What percent-
age is spent on data cache accesses?
1.15
[10/10/20/20] <1.10> Your company has just bought a new 22-core processor,
and you have been tasked with optimizing your software for this processor.
You will run four applications on this system, but the resource requirements are
not equal. Assume the system and application characteristics listed in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1 Four applications
ApplicationABCD
% resources needed41271814
% parallelizable50806090Case Studies and Exercises by Diana Franklin
■
75
The percentage of resources of assuming they are all run in serial. Assume
that when you parallelize a portion of the program by X, the speedup for that
portion is X.
a. [10] <1.10> How much speedup would result from running application A on
the entire 22-core processor, as compared to running it serially?
b. [10] <1.10> How much speedup would result from running application D on
the entire 22-core processor, as compared to running it serially?
c. [20] <1.10> Given that application A requires 41% of the resources, if we stat-
ically assign it 41% of the cores, what is the overall speedup if A is run paral-
lelized but everything else is run serially?
d. [20] <1.10> What is the overall speedup if all four applications are statically
assigned some of the cores, relative to their percentage of resource needs, and
all run parallelized?
e. [10] <1.10> Given acceleration through parallelization, what new percentage
of the resources are the applications receiving, considering only active time on
their statically-assigned cores?
1.16
[10/20/20/20/25] <1.10> When parallelizing an application, the ideal speedup is
speeding up by the number of processors. This is limited by two things: percentage
of the application that can be parallelized and the cost of communication.
Amdahl’s Law takes into account the former but not the latter.
a. [10] <1.10> What is the speedup with N processors if 80% of the application is
parallelizable, ignoring the cost of communication?
b. [20] <1.10> What is the speedup with eight processors if, for every processor
added, the communication overhead is 0.5% of the original execution time.
c. [20] <1.10> What is the speedup with eight processors if, for every time the
number of processors is doubled, the communication overhead is increased
by 0.5% of the original execution time?
d. [20] <1.10> What is the speedup with N processors if, for every time the num-
ber of processors is doubled, the communication overhead is increased by 0.5%
of the original execution time?
e. [25] <1.10> Write the general equation that solves this question: What is the
number of processors with the highest speedup in an application in which P% of
the original execution time is parallelizable, and, for every time the number of
processors is doubled, the communication is increased by 0.5% of the original
execution time?
